Contents
04
Key highlights from this study
45
Longer-term perspective — overview of 
risks for 2034
26
Highlights of key differences 
across subsets of respondents
12
Major takeaways about emerging risks
07
Methodology
20
A series of calls to action
34
The top risk concerns for 2024
129 Analysis across geographic regions
54
Analysis across different sizes of organizations
155 Evaluating an organization’s approach
to risk oversight
62
Analysis across executive positions represented
147 Responses to open-ended questions on major
2024 concerns
140 Analysis across public and non-public entities
160 Research team and authors
87
Analysis across industry groups
149 Plans to deploy resources to enhance risk
management capabilities
39
Three-year comparison of risks
2

Protiviti and NC State University’s ERM Initiative are 
pleased to provide our 12th annual report focusing 
on the top risks currently on the minds of 1,143 
directors and senior executives around the globe. 
This report reflects their views on the extent to 
which a broad collection of risks is likely to affect 
their organizations over the next year — 2024 — and 
a decade later — 2034.
The top 10 risk lists for the next 12 
months (2024) and 10 years out (2034)
The table to the right summarizes the top 10 risks for 2024 
and 2034. As indicated by the red arrows, three of the top 
10 risks for 2024 are rated higher than they were for 2023, 
and nine of the 2034 risks are higher than last year’s survey 
that also looked out a decade. Eight of the top 10 risks for 
2024 as well as eight top risks looking out a decade (2034) 
were also long-term risks in last year’s survey, suggesting 
these risks may have a persistent long-term impact.
Top risks for 2024
1. Economic conditions, including inflationary 
pressures
2. Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
3. Cyber threats
4. Third-party risks
5. Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6. Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply
7. Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors
8. Change in current interest rate environment
9. Increases in labor costs
10. Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations
Top risks for 2034
1. Cyber threats
2. Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
3. Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply
4. Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces
5. Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6. Third-party risks
7. Economic conditions, including inflationary 
pressures
8. Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors
9. Increases in labor costs
10. Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics 
to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency
3

Key highlights from this study
Major themes for 2024 and 2034
	• Multiple sources of uncertainty create potential for 
a wide range of near-term horizon risks. The shift 
in top risks from last year reveals a global business 
environment experiencing significant change, with many 
new risk concerns for 2024 relative to last year.
	• Recent geopolitical developments are changing the risk 
landscape. Prior to the October 7, 2023, developments 
in the Middle East, no risks were rated at the “Significant 
Impact” level for 2024; however, after the attacks, 
many risks increased, with four rated at the “Significant 
Impact” level.
	• Economic concerns zoom to the top risk position near-
term. Economic conditions, particularly inflationary 
pressures, replaced the ability to attract, develop and 
retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges as the number one risk 
globally for 2024. 
	• Myriad technology-related challenges include escalated 
cybersecurity risks, continued data privacy concerns 
linked to increased third-party reliance, the need to 
upskill employees to realize fully the value proposition 
of emerging technologies, and the limitations of legacy 
infrastructure. These technology-linked risks are 
interrelated and need to be considered collectively by 
executives and the board, as exposures triggered by one 
risk may lead to increased exposure to other risks.
	– Cybersecurity represents an ongoing challenge 
for both the near-term and long-term. Challenges 
related to cyber threats are increasingly on the minds 
of global executives, moving from the 15th-ranked 
risk last year to the third-ranked risk for 2024 and 
the top risk for 2034, up from 15th in last year’s 
long-term horizon assessment. The increasing use 
of technology to drive innovation and efficiencies 
and increased reliance on third parties create more 
opportunities for cyber vulnerabilities to be exposed, 
particularly to nation-state and other threat actors 
determined to exploit these opportunities for 
geopolitical advantages and financial gain. 
	– Legacy IT systems and existing operations may 
make it difficult for incumbents to compete with 
nimbler “born digital” competitors. Not only do 
outdated systems create competitive limitations, but 
they also present unintended exposures that may 
lead to cybersecurity and data privacy concerns. 
Executives reveal this as both a short-term and long-
term top 10 risk concern.
	– Coupled with cyber threat concerns, executives 
are also focused on the challenge of addressing 
proliferating identity protection expectations. 
As regulations proliferate and overall public 
expectations surrounding the protection of 
sensitive, private data evolve, business leaders 
are concerned about their organization’s ability to 
protect the information they collect, process, store 
and manage from unintentional exposure. 
	• People-related risks intertwine the top near-term and 
long-term risks. Talent-related issues dominated the top 
risks in the prior year’s survey, and executives continue 
to focus on risks related to finding and retaining the right 
kind of talent for their organization’s strategic success. 
Overarching concerns about attracting, developing and 
retaining top talent, including succession challenges, 
remain near the top of all risk issues (as the number 
two risk for 2024), with that concern continuing for 
the long term (it remains as the number two risk for 
2034). Relatedly, executives are particularly focused 
on challenges associated with attracting unique kinds 
4

of talent and upskilling existing employees, which will 
allow their organizations to embrace emerging digital 
technologies, with that particular concern making 
the top 10 list of risks for both 2024 and 2034. Given 
this race for talent, executives continue to note that 
increases in labor costs will be a challenge now and a 
decade later.
	• Third-party risks rise in importance. Challenges related 
to existing core operations and legacy IT systems, 
competitive pressures, pursuits to achieve greater 
efficiencies, and difficulties in attracting talent may be 
motivating organizations to increase the use of joint 
ventures, alliances and various kinds of third-party 
relationships to manage a number of processes. With 
greater reliance on third parties to perform critical 
business services, executives are increasingly focused 
on new risks that may emerge in light of these external 
partnerships. Among all 36 risks considered by executives 
in this year’s survey, risks linked to third parties increased 
the most from the prior year, moving from the 17th 
position last year to the 4th position for 2024. It also 
made the top 10 list of risks for a decade out. 
	• Regulatory changes and scrutiny are heightened for 
the near-term and a decade out. The potential for 
expansion in rules and regulatory oversight is creating 
increased concerns not only for 2024, but also 2034 
given it represents a top five risk for both the near-term 
and long-term horizons. Specific regulatory risks vary 
by industry. For example, recently proposed laws and 
regulations in financial services may increase capital and 
liquidity requirements and compliance costs, resulting in 
reduced returns. Technology companies face increasing 
regulatory oversight on a number of fronts. Such 
concerns are pervasive across other industries, as worries 
about expanding government regulations and agency 
enforcement — particularly related to data privacy, 
climate disclosures, sustainability reporting, cyber breach 
disclosures, expanded attestation requirements and other 
matters — are higher than reported in last year’s survey 
for both the coming year and a decade out.
	• Looking out a decade highlights how many short-term 
risks are likely to have a lingering impact over the 
next 10 years. Eight of the top 10 risks for 2024 are 
top 10 risk concerns in 2034, although there are shifts 
in relative importance within the top 10. This signals 
the importance of thinking robustly about responses 
to these risks, given their relative importance for both 
short-term and long-term performance. Furthermore, 
eight of the top 10 risks looking out 10 years in last 
year’s survey remain on the top 10 list for 2034.
Interestingly, respondents signal a heightened overall 
risk concern as they look out a decade, given they rated 
nine of the top 10 risks higher for 2034 than they did 
when looking out a decade in last year’s survey. The 
persistence of these risks, continued occurrence of 
unexpected events and the specter of intensifying 
geopolitical tensions create a nuanced view of the 
future. On the geopolitical front, for example, Russia’s 
aggression in Ukraine, the war in the Middle East, the 
declining trust in American institutions, the proliferation 
of disinformation and propaganda, and the convergence 
of China, Russia, Iran and North Korea in opposition to 
Western democracies provide a combustible mix that 
is likely impacting leaders’ assessment of the long-term 
global risk landscape.
	• Disruptive innovations and the inability to utilize 
rigorous data analytics are creating significant pause 
for executives as they think about their organization’s 
long-term competitive positioning. Continued advances 
in artificial intelligence (AI) and other technologies are 
driving a wave of disruption that will impact business 
models, sweep away obsolete strategies and alter 
customer experiences. Navigating the rapid pace of 
these digital innovations and finding ways to leverage 
insights from the volumes of data organizations must 
evaluate are particularly concerning to executives as 
they think about their organizations a decade from now. 
Those technology and innovation concerns cannot be 
separated from other risk concerns making the top 10 
for 2034 related to shortages of talent to manage the 
adoption of digital technologies, the dependence on 
legacy IT systems, and overarching cyber and privacy 
concerns. Once again, these interconnected risks cannot 
be viewed in isolation.
5

The interrelated nature of the risks comprising the 
top 10 for both the near-term and a decade later 
highlight the importance of managing risks from a 
portfolio, enterprisewide perspective. Evaluating 
risks individually may overlook the reality that a 
single risk event may be sourced across multiple 
risk concerns. Robust conversations about 
assumptions related to the organization’s future, 
overlapping root causes across different risks 
and dependences on single responses to manage 
multiple risks can benefit executives and boards 
with insights about how a given risk may interact 
with others to impact an organization’s strategic 
success and long-term viability.
6

Methodology
We are pleased with the global reach of our 12th annual 
survey, with strong participation from 1,143 respondents 
across a variety of industries. Our survey captures insights 
from C-suite executives and directors, 43% of whom represent 
companies based in North America, 16% in Europe, 11% in 
Asia, 9% in Latin America, and 8% in Australia/New Zealand, 
with the remaining 13% from India, Africa and the Middle East.
Our survey was conducted online in September and 
October of 2023 to capture perspectives on risks on 
the minds of executives as they peered into 2024 and a 
decade later (2034). Each respondent was asked to rate 36 
individual risk issues across three dimensions.
	• Macroeconomic risks likely to affect their organization’s 
growth opportunities
	• Strategic risks the organization faces that may affect the 
validity of its strategy for pursuing growth opportunities
	• Operational risks that might affect key operations of the 
organization in executing its strategy
Table 1 lists the 36 risk issues rated by our respondents. 
Each risk was rated in terms of its relative impact using a 
10-point scale, where a score of 1 reflects “No Impact at 
All” and a score of 10 reflects “Extensive Impact” to their 
organization over the next year. We also asked them to 
consider how each of these risks was likely to affect their 
organization 10 years in the future (i.e., in 2034).
For each of the 36 risk issues, we computed the average 
score reported by all respondents. Using mean scores 
across respondents, we rank-ordered risks from highest to 
lowest impact. This approach enabled us to compare mean 
scores across the past three years to highlight changes in 
the perceived level of risk.
Consistent with our prior studies, we grouped all the 
risks based on their average scores into one of three 
classifications:
	• Risks with an average score of 6.0 or higher are classified 
as having a “Significant Impact” over the next 12 months 
(2024)/over the next decade (2034).
	• Risks with an average score of 4.51 through 5.99 are 
classified as having a “Potential Impact” over the next 12 
months (2024)/over the next decade (2034).
	• Risks with an average score of 4.50 or lower are 
classified as having a “Less Significant Impact” over the 
next 12 months (2024)/over the next decade (2034).
We refer to these risk classifications throughout our report as 
we provide high-level insights from taking a portfolio view of 
both the short-term and long-term risk issues. We follow that 
with detailed sub-analyses across a variety of dimensions.
We begin with an overview of overarching risk insights based 
on a collective analysis of both short-term and long-term risk 
findings from our survey. Following that overview, we highlight 
several calls for action that executives may want to consider 
as they evaluate the effectiveness of their organization’s risk 
governance processes in light of the key findings. 
In addition to the global, overarching insights, we also 
review results for various subgroups (i.e., company size, 
position held by respondent, industry representation, 
geographic location and organization type). With respect to 
the various industries, we grouped related industry sectors 
into combined industry groupings to facilitate analysis, 
consistent with our prior years’ reports. 
We conclude this report with a discussion of plans among 
organizations to improve their capabilities for managing 
risks and end with diagnostic questions executives and 
directors may find helpful to consider when evaluating risk 
assessment and risk management processes.
7

TABLE 1
List of 36 risk issues analyzed
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
•	
Increases in labor costs — Anticipated increases in labor costs may affect our 
opportunity to meet profitability targets
•	
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates — Anticipated 
volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates may create 
significantly challenging issues for our organization to address
•	
Changes in global markets and trade policies — Evolving changes in assumptions 
underlying globalization and in global trade policies, escalating tariffs, border 
restrictions, targeted embargoes, shifts to multilateralism and emergence of regional 
trading alliances may affect our ability to operate and source effectively and efficiently 
in international markets
•	
Access to capital/liquidity — Our ability to access sufficient capital/liquidity may 
restrict growth opportunities for our organization
•	
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures — Economic conditions 
(including inflationary pressures) in markets we currently serve may significantly 
restrict growth opportunities, impact margins or require new skill sets for our 
organization
•	
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply — The adoption 
of digital technologies (e.g., artificial intelligence, automation in all of its forms, natural 
language processing, visual recognition software, augmented/virtual reality simulations 
and the metaverse) in the marketplace and in our organization may require cross-
functional skills in Agile, Lean and design that are in short supply in the market as well 
as significant efforts to upskill and reskill existing employees to fully utilize the new 
capabilities 
•	
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in governmental regimes or 
expansion of global terrorism — Political uncertainty surrounding the influence and 
continued tenure of key global leaders, geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts, and 
instability in governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism may restrict the 
achievement of our global growth and profitability objectives
•	
Change in current interest rate environment — The current interest rate environment 
may have a significant effect on the organization’s capital costs and operations
•	
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation — Government policies 
surrounding public health practices (in response to a pandemic) and stimulus to drive 
recovery and national resilience may significantly impact the performance of our 
business
•	
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and 
compete — Shifts in perspectives and expectations about social issues and priorities 
surrounding diversity, equity and inclusion (e.g., board composition, representation in 
the C-suite and leadership ranks, and onboarding policies) are occurring faster than the 
pace at which our organization is motivated and able to manage effectively, which may 
significantly impact our ability to attract/retain talent and compete in the marketplace
8

Strategic Risk Issues
•	
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies 
and/or other market forces — Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by 
advanced technologies (e.g., artificial intelligence, including advancements such as 
generative AI; automation in all of its forms; hyper-scalable platforms; faster data 
transmission; quantum computing; blockchain; digital currencies; and the metaverse) 
and/or other market forces may outpace our organization’s ability to compete and/or 
operate successfully without making significant changes to our business model
•	
Social media developments and platform technology innovations — Rapidly expanding 
developments in social media, including the spread of misinformation and disinformation, 
and platform technology innovations may significantly impact how we do business, 
interact with our customers, ensure regulatory compliance and/or manage our brand
•	
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny — Regulatory changes and scrutiny may 
heighten, noticeably affecting the way our processes are designed and our products or 
services are produced or delivered
•	
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as expectations of key stakeholders — 
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability issues and related ESG 
policies, regulations and expanding disclosure requirements, as well as expectations 
and emerging regulations of governments, current and potential employees, and other 
stakeholders about “green” initiatives, supply chain transparency, fairness in reward 
systems, and other governance and sustainability issues, may require us to significantly 
alter our strategy and business model in ways that may be difficult for us to implement 
as timely as the actions of our competitors
•	
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment 
— Ease of entrance of new competitors into the industry and marketplace or 
other significant changes in the competitive environment (such as major market 
concentrations due to M&A activity) may threaten our market share
•	
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected crisis — 
Our organization may not be sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected 
crisis (including a catastrophic event) significantly impacting our operations or reputation
•	
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities — 
Growth opportunities through acquisitions, joint ventures and other partnership 
activities may be difficult to identify and implement
•	
Limited opportunities for organic growth — Opportunities for organic growth through 
customer acquisition and/or enhancement may be significantly limited for our organization
•	
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business — Substitute 
products and services may arise from competitors that enhance the customer experience 
and affect the viability of our current business model and planned strategic initiatives
•	
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention — Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
may be increasingly difficult due to evolving customer preferences for different 
products, services and buying experiences and/or demographic shifts in our existing 
customer base
•	
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders — Performance shortfalls 
(including lack of progress on ESG goals/expectations) may trigger activist shareholders 
who seek significant changes to our organization’s strategic plan and vision
•	
Formulating business response to legal, political and social issues that are polarizing 
— Our organization may not be prepared to formulate and communicate effectively 
its response to legal, political and social issues and other related market developments 
that are polarizing to key stakeholders*
* This risk is new to the 2024 survey.
9

Operational Risk Issues
•	
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work environment — 
Changes in the overall work environment, including shifts to hybrid environments, 
expansion of digital labor (e.g., through the impact of generative AI), changes in the 
nature of work and who does that work, and M&A activities, may lead to challenges to 
sustaining our organization’s culture and business model***
•	
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem — Uncertainty surrounding 
our organization’s core supply chain including the viability of key suppliers, scarcity of 
supplies, reshoring/offshoring/friend-shoring initiatives, energy sources, unpredictable 
shipping and distribution logistical issues, or lack of price stability in the supply chain 
ecosystem may make it difficult to deliver our products or services at acceptable 
margins
•	
Third-party risks — Third-party risks arising from our reliance on outsourcing and 
strategic sourcing arrangements, ecosystem partners, IT vendor contracts, and other 
partnerships/joint ventures to achieve operational and go-to-market objectives may 
prevent us from meeting organizational targets or impact our brand image
•	
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges — Our organization’s ability to attract, develop 
and retain top talent, navigate evolving labor expectations and demands (including 
generational distinctions), and address succession challenges amid the constraints of a 
tightening talent/labor market may limit our ability to achieve operational targets
•	
Cyber threats — Our organization may not be sufficiently prepared to manage cyber 
threats such as ransomware and other attacks that have the potential to significantly 
disrupt core operations and/or damage our brand
•	
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry — Incidents of fraud are increasing in our 
industry, which may lead to increased costs and damage to our reputation*
•	
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations — 
Ensuring data privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations 
and regulations may require alterations demanding significant resources to restructure 
how we collect, store, share and use data to run our business
•	
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” competitors — Our existing operating processes, 
in-house talent, legacy IT infrastructure, lack of digital expertise and/or insufficient 
digital knowledge and proficiency in the C-suite and boardroom may result in failure to 
meet performance expectations related to quality, time to market, cost and innovation 
as well as our competitors, including those that are either “born digital” or investing 
heavily to leverage technology for competitive advantage
•	
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency — Inability to utilize advanced data analytics and “big data” 
to achieve market intelligence, gain insights on the customer experience, and increase 
productivity and efficiency may significantly affect our management of core operations 
and strategic plans
•	
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting business model and core 
operations — Resistance to change in our culture may restrict our organization from 
making necessary adjustments to the business model and core operations on a timely 
basis
* This risk is new to the 2024 survey.
**	 This risk was new to the 2023 survey.
***	 This risk was new to the 2022 survey.
10

* This risk is new to the 2024 survey.
**	 This risk was new to the 2023 survey.
Operational Risk Issues (continued)
•	
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely identification and 
escalation of emerging risk issues — Our organization’s culture may not sufficiently 
encourage the timely identification and escalation of emerging risk issues and market 
opportunities that have the potential to significantly affect our core operations and 
achievement of strategic objectives
•	
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety of employees (including 
their well-being and mental health), customers, suppliers and our communities 
— Our ability to meet expectations around protecting the health and safety of 
employees (including their well-being and mental health), customers, suppliers 
and the communities in which we operate may be insufficient to receive market 
permission to operate or encourage people to work for us or do business with us and 
to do so in a safe environment
•	
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part 
of a hybrid work environment — Our approach to managing ongoing demands on or 
expectations of a significant portion of our workforce to “work remotely” or increased 
expectations for a transformed, collaborative hybrid work environment and distributed 
workforce may negatively impact our ability to retain talent as well as the effectiveness 
and efficiency of how we operate our business
•	
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena — The 
rising threat associated with catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena 
(e.g., wildfires, floods, extreme heat/cold, cyclones/hurricanes/typhoons) may create 
significant operational challenges that threaten our assets and employees as well as our 
ability to deliver products and services to customers**
11

Major takeaways about emerging risks
What you need to know
The big picture: The churn in this year’s survey results 
points to multiple sources of uncertainty, painting a cloudy, 
interconnected picture of the business landscape.
	• Near term, there is continued economic uncertainty causing 
executives to sharpen their focus on managing external 
risks (inflation, cyber threats, interest rates, third-party 
exposures, etc.) and increasing organizational resilience. 
Long term, executives remain on guard for what comes 
next — as illustrated by the uptick in risks following recent 
events in the Middle East.
A key point: Geopolitical events are driving notable changes in 
global risk perceptions.
	• Cyber threats, third-party risks, economic conditions, and 
the ability to attract and retain talent are among many 
other risk issues exhibiting a significant ratings jump post 
October 7 in our survey. Clearly, events in the Middle East 
are elevating long-term concerns.
Economic conditions, including inflation, represent the top 
risk issue for 2024.
	• Uncertainty continues in the market over central bank 
policies amid persistent inflation being fueled by rising 
labor costs (driven by skilled labor shortages), outsized 
government stimulus, the West’s de-risking reliance upon 
China, regional conflicts, and other developments in the 
geopolitical landscape.
	• Underlying the uneasiness about the economy are concerns 
around the current interest rate environment significantly 
affecting the organization’s capital costs and operations.
Cybersecurity is the most pressing risk issue when combining 
near- and long-term views.
	• Elevated cybersecurity concerns reflect growing 
recognition of a complex cyber risk landscape that is 
impacted by the exponential curve of technological 
advances, increasing reliance on third parties and other 
market forces.
	• Ensuring compliance with growing identity protection 
expectations made the top 10 for 2024 as well, 
demonstrating the interrelated nature of cybersecurity 
and privacy risks.
Data privacy and “big data” remain key areas of focus.
	• Organizations successful in deploying forward-looking lead 
indicators and integrated analytics are likely to be more 
anticipatory and less reactive than those that aren’t.
People-related risks also remain top of mind.
	• Finding and keeping talent remains a major concern, even 
amid an uneven economy searching for a soft landing. 
	• Initiatives to embrace new technologies necessitate the need 
to reskill and upskill employees, presenting a challenge both 
now and in the future; so do rising labor costs.
Third-party risks rise in importance.
	• This is likely due to increasing reliance on outsourcing and 
strategic sourcing arrangements, ecosystem partners, IT 
vendor contracts, and other partnerships and joint ventures 
to achieve operational and go-to-market objectives. Cyber 
threats and regulatory compliance risks also come into play.
Regulatory changes and scrutiny loom both near- and 
long-term.
	• As continued economic uncertainty increases the likelihood 
governments and various agencies will interfere with market 
functions through regulatory overreach and even excess, there 
is uncertainty over the likelihood and magnitude of industry-
specific and pervasive changes in the regulatory landscape.
Climate change and sustainability risks have elevated and are 
rated as a top five risk by respondents from Europe and the 
Middle East.
12

The combined analysis of risk insights from global 
executives for both 2024 and a decade out reveals several 
interrelated challenges that may result in significant events 
with the potential to test an organization’s business agility 
and resilience.
Changes in the profile of top risks from the prior year 
disclose a number of shifting conditions that may disrupt 
markets, including events triggered by intensifying 
geopolitical conditions. Many of those events are expected 
to have long-lasting impacts on business models and the 
competitive balance in a nuanced global marketplace. 
Board members and C-suite leaders who recognize 
these shifting realities and address them through robust, 
enterprisewide risk analyses that are aligned with business 
strategy possess a differentiating skill that positions their 
organization’s readiness and ability to adjust and pivot in 
the face of inevitable disruptive change as well as or better 
than their competitors.
There are a number of significant takeaways from this 
year’s study for boards and executives to consider:
The churn in this year’s survey for 2024 and escalation 
of importance of several risks point to multiple sources 
of uncertainty, painting a cloudy picture of the business 
landscape.
While not a surprise, our research results confirm that 
organizational risk profiles are sensitive to events and risks 
that can emerge rapidly and sometimes unexpectedly. The 
escalation of the importance of multiple near- and long-
term risks conveys the stark reality of disruptive change in 
today’s dynamic times. In the near term, there is continued 
economic uncertainty causing executives to sharpen their 
focus on managing external risks (inflation, cyber threats, 
interest rates, third-party exposures, etc.) and increasing 
organizational resilience. As for the longer term, executives 
remain on guard for what comes next — as illustrated by 
recent events in the Middle East.
Geopolitical events drive notable changes in risk 
perceptions.
A notable trend in our global results this year is what the 
findings reveal before and after October 7, 2023, when 
events in Israel and Gaza erupted. Based on the responses 
submitted prior to this date, no risks were rated at the 
“Significant Impact” level for 2024, whereas after this 
date four risks are rated at this level: economic conditions 
(including inflationary pressures), cyber threats, ability to 
attract and retain talent, and third-party risks. In addition, 
the scores for most risk issues increased post October 7, 
including the risk related to geopolitical shifts, regional 
conflicts and instability in governmental regimes or 
expansion of global terrorism. 
What’s even more telling are the risk scores in the 10-year 
outlook. Whereas five of the long-term risk issues were 
rated at the “Significant Impact” level among responses 
submitted prior to October 7, respondents after this date 
rated 12 at this level. Among the many notable jumps in 
scores, the geopolitical-related risk issue rose from 5.35 
prior to October 7 to 6.06 after this date — highlighting 
it as “Significant Impact.” Cyber threats, third-party risks, 
economic conditions, and the ability to attract and retain 
talent are among many other risk issues exhibiting a 
significant ratings jump. Clearly, events in the Middle East are 
elevating long-term concerns among directors and C-suite 
leaders about the impact on their businesses.
Economic conditions, including inflation, represent the 
top risk issue for 2024. 
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures, are 
the top-rated risk overall for 2024 (up from second in 2023). 
Near term, uncertainty continues in the market over central 
bank policies amid persistent inflation being fueled by rising 
labor costs (driven by robust employment and skilled labor 
shortages, particularly in countries where birth rates have 
dropped significantly), outsized government stimulus, the 
West’s de-risking reliance upon China, regional conflicts, 
other developments in the geopolitical landscape, and 
increasing shelter, food and energy prices. The open question 
is whether these market developments and policies will lead 
13

to some form of soft landing or to either a mild or severe 
recession; or worse, a sustained period of stagnant growth. 
Organizations may face a dramatic change in the business 
landscape in the coming year, especially considering recent 
events in the Middle East and their potential to spread 
throughout the region. 
Underlying the uneasiness about the economy are concerns 
around the current interest rate environment significantly 
affecting the organization’s capital costs and operations. Of 
note, while the rating for most risks in our survey decreased 
year-over-year looking out 12 months, economic risk 
declined the least among those risks that decreased from 
last year’s survey, remaining relatively stable year-over-year. 
Looking out 10 years, economic conditions represent the 
seventh-ranked risk. Economic headwinds remain a concern 
over the long-term, beyond the shorter-term issues such as 
inflationary trends that are driving current concerns.
Cybersecurity is the most pressing risk issue when 
combining near- and long-term views.
While the economy is the top-ranked risk for the coming 
year, cyber threats arguably stand out as the most 
significant risk issue for boards and C-suite leaders when 
assessing both near- and long-term outlooks. For the 
next decade, cyber threats jumped from the 13th-ranked 
risk in last year’s study to the top-rated risk for the 2034 
outlook. For this time period, the risk rating for cyber 
threats increased more than 11% — by far the largest risk 
rating increase noted in the survey. Cyber concerns are also 
elevated near term, jumping from 15th in last year’s survey 
to third this year when looking out 12 months. 
Elevated cybersecurity concerns reflect growing recognition 
of a complex cyber risk landscape that is impacted by the 
exponential curve of technological advances. Specifically, 
considering the significance with which boards and C-suite 
leaders view this risk over the next 10 years, it’s possible that 
technologies such as AI (including generative AI), cloud, and 
even the anticipated emergence of quantum computing and 
how organizations will secure their data and operations in a 
post-quantum world are raising significant security-related 
questions and concerns in the boardroom and C-suite. But 
other forces, such as increasing reliance on third parties and 
geopolitical tensions, also contribute to the threat landscape. 
Regarding the geopolitical picture, competing national 
interests, nation-state territorial aspirations and global 
terrorism are powerful forces that can affect cyber risk 
assessments in particular regions and countries.
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity 
protection expectations made the top 10 for 2024 as well, 
demonstrating the interrelated nature of cybersecurity and 
privacy risks.
Amid economic and cyber concerns, people-related risks 
also remain top of mind; culture and workplace evolution 
have taken a back seat — at least for now. 
A number of important themes related to people and 
culture emerged from our results:
	• Finding and keeping talent remains a major concern, 
even amid an uneven economy. This is the second 
highest-ranked risk for both 2024 and 2034. 
	• The need to reskill and upskill employees is a challenge 
both now and in the future. The state of labor markets 
and the expected adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply are such that 
significant efforts will be necessary to upskill and reskill 
existing employees over the next decade. This is the sixth- 
and third-ranked risk, respectively, for 2024 and 2034. It 
is clear that the solution to growth is rooted in increasing 
productivity, not headcount. Embracing technology is 
part of the solution, particularly in countries where the 
working population is declining, immigration policy is not 
aligned with this reality and offshoring is giving way to 
re-shoring. These market forces necessitate the need for 
upskilling the existing workforce.
	• Rising labor costs continue to be a persistent concern. 
Driven by shortages in skilled labor, increases in labor costs 
represent the ninth-ranked risk for both 2024 and 2034. 
	• Broader return-to-work trends in the market, 
workplace evolution are less of an issue. Managing 
14

demands on or expectations of the workforce to work 
remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment fell 
to the 24th-ranked risk for 2024, down from ninth for 
2023. Leaders are seeing more clearly how to deal with 
this issue as the workplace continues to evolve. They are 
adapting to a world profoundly affected by the pandemic 
experience, a world in which many exited the workforce, 
have rethought work-life balance and/or are re-entering 
the workforce with different priorities.
	• Culture-related risks have fallen in relative importance. 
Resistance to change restricting the organization 
from adjusting its business model and core operations 
fell from the fourth-ranked risk in both the 12-month 
and 10-year outlooks last year to 14th and 18th, 
respectively, this year. The organization’s culture not 
sufficiently encouraging timely identification and 
escalation of emerging risk issues fell from eighth to 
17th in the 12-month outlook and from 16th to 21st 
in the 10-year outlook. These declines may be due 
to companies’ emphasis on increasing organizational 
resilience and employees’ risk awareness in a rapidly 
evolving business environment. 
Third-party risks rise in importance. 
Interestingly, relative to other risks, third-party risks 
increased from 17th and 15th in last year’s 12-month and 
10-year outlooks, respectively, to fourth and sixth for 2024 
and 2034, respectively, in this year’s survey. This increase 
is likely due to increasing reliance on outsourcing and 
strategic sourcing arrangements, ecosystem partners, IT 
vendor contracts, and other partnerships/joint ventures 
to achieve operational and go-to-market objectives. 
Cyber threats and regulatory compliance risks (e.g., 
data privacy regulations) also come into play here, as 
organizations must ensure their third-party vendors (as 
well as their third parties’ vendors further downstream) 
are complying with current laws and regulations. It may 
also be attributable to the geopolitical climate, e.g., the 
West de-risking its reliance on China, laws and regulations 
restricting business activities and operations in certain 
countries, and other developments having implications that 
extend to an organization’s reliance on third parties. These 
interconnected risks highlight the importance for boards 
and C-suite executives to take a portfolio, enterprisewide 
view of oversight of emerging risks. 
The specter of regulatory changes and scrutiny — in wide-
ranging industry-specific and pervasive areas — looms 
both near- and long-term. 
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny increased 
relative to other risks, both near-term and long-term. 
This issue is the fifth-ranked risk overall for both 2024 
and 2034, up from 16th and ninth overall in last year’s 
12-month and 10-year outlooks, respectively. As continued 
economic uncertainty increases the likelihood governments 
and various agencies will interfere with market functions 
through regulatory overreach and even excess, directors 
and C-suite leaders appear to perceive uncertainty over 
the likelihood and magnitude of forthcoming changes in the 
regulatory landscape that will affect their organizations. 
These concerns are often industry-specific. For example:
	• In financial services, various regulations in different 
regions may increase capital and liquidity requirements 
and compliance costs, resulting in higher borrowing 
costs and reduced shareholder returns. 
	• Technology companies face increasing accountability 
for the impact of their innovations and products on 
consumers and the public, including the social implications 
of third-party content that misinforms and disinforms.
	• Energy and utility organizations face scrutiny on the 
environmental impact from their production and use of 
fossil fuels.
In addition, a growing number of laws and regulations 
emerging around the world have pervasive impacts 
across industries. Examples include data privacy, climate 
disclosures, sustainability reporting, cyber breach 
disclosures, expanded attestation requirements and other 
matters, all of which may be elevating concerns among 
organization leadership. Many of these pervasive issues fall 
to public companies. Accordingly, it is noteworthy that they 
were the only organizational type to report a slight increase 
in the overall magnitude and severity of risks for 2024.
15

Prior to the COVID-19 pandemic, regulatory risk was 
almost always rated a top 10 risk since this global survey 
began 12 years ago. Now that the pandemic is in the 
rearview mirror for most observers, regulatory uncertainty 
appears to have reclaimed its “rightful place” in the global 
risk profile. 
The 10-year top risks outlook: More disruptive times lie 
ahead. 
Long-term, the top risks landscape is relatively stable, as 
eight of the top 10 risks last year are on this year’s top 10 
list. However, risk levels longer-term are elevated over the 
10-year outlook last year and the near-term outlook this 
year. Six of the risks are rated at the “Significant Impact” level 
(versus three last year). Risk issues of concern looking out 
10 years include cyber threats, attracting and retaining top 
talent and labor and succession challenges, the need for new 
skills to fully deploy newly adopted digital technologies, rapid 
speed of disruptive innovation, evolving regulatory issues, 
the impact of third-party risks on business performance and 
brand image, uncertain economic conditions, the limiting 
obstruction of aged technical architecture, anticipated 
labor cost increases, and inability to deploy advanced data 
analytics (the “big data” problem). 
This dynamic risk landscape and its elevated risk levels 
sustain the ongoing narrative that the 2020s are indeed 
a decade of disruption. With continued advances in AI, 
automation in all of its forms, ever-increasing connectivity, 
quantum computing, blockchain and digital currencies, 
and the metaverse, the market is likely to experience the 
largest wave of disruption since the turn of the century. 
This disruption will manifest itself in many ways, e.g., 
new business models, rapid product innovation, changing 
customer value propositions and disintermediation of 
distribution channels, and different needs for skills and 
talent. It will sweep away obsolete strategies, traditional 
moats, technical debt-laden architectures, conventional 
management playbooks and old school employee skills. 
The never-ending question every organization faces in the 
global marketplace: Are we being disrupted and, if so, how 
and when would we know? 
Data privacy and “big data” remain key areas of focus. 
The complexity of the data privacy regulatory environment 
continues as a priority for organizations. Risks associated 
with data privacy are ranked 10th for 2024 and 11th 
for 2034, compared with being ranked 12th and fifth, 
respectively, for the 12-month and 10-year outlooks in 
last year’s survey. Conversely, the risk of inability to utilize 
rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and 
increase productivity and efficiency is ranked 10th overall 
looking out 10 years but is the 11th-ranked risk for 2024. 
Organizations successful in deploying forward-looking 
lead indicators and integrated analytics are likely to be 
more anticipatory and less reactive than those that aren’t 
— and leaders know it. These capabilities generate the 
information and insights so essential to arming decision-
makers with a time advantage in disruptive markets. 
Climate change and sustainability risks have elevated. 
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability 
policies, regulations and expanding disclosure requirements 
as well as expectations of key stakeholders increased 
from the 28th-ranked risk looking out 12 months last year 
to the 22nd-ranked risk this year. Interestingly, looking 
out 10 years, this issue increased from the 20th-ranked 
risk last year to the 13th-ranked risk this year. Typically 
associated with existential planetary threats, climate- and 
sustainability-related risks are garnering more attention 
at a micro level by individual organizations relative to 
other risks. Growing regulatory focus (e.g., the Corporate 
Sustainability Reporting Directive in the EU) is likely to 
keep this risk issue on the radar long-term. Note that the 
focus on climate change and sustainability is the second 
highest-rated risk in Europe. Therefore, it is important that 
leadership teams in regions such as the U.S., where ESG is 
perceived as a polarizing concept, not construe the regional 
view as representative of a global perspective.
16

Concerns over supply chain issues have subsided. 
Uncertainty surrounding the core supply chain ecosystem 
is ranked 19th for 2024, quite a fall from ranking fifth 
in 2023. Many of the issues in the supply chain were a 
product of the disruption and congestion caused by the 
COVID-19 pandemic. These issues have been unwinding 
for some time. This risk was not viewed as a significant 
long-term concern last year and is not this year (ranked 
25th looking out to 2034).
Risk levels declined from last year but remain higher than 
two years ago. 
The participants were invited to rate the magnitude 
and severity of the total risk landscape impacting their 
organizations achieving performance goals over the next 
12 months. On a 10-point scale, the overall ratings over the 
last three years are 6.35 looking forward to 2024, 6.70 for 
2023 and 6.21 for 2022, as illustrated in Figure 1.
Of note, impressions of the magnitude and severity of the 
risk landscape organizations will face over the next 12 
months showed some differences pre- and post-October 
7, 2023, when the Israel-Gaza events erupted. The overall 
rating among responses collected before October 7 is 6.34, 
whereas it increased to 6.51 among responses collected 
after October 7.
FIGURE 1
Overall, what is your impression of the 
magnitude and severity of risks your 
organization will be facing with respect 
to achieving your performance goals 
over the next 12 months?
2024
2023
2022
Magnitude/severity 
of risks
6.35
6.70
6.21
4
5
6
7
Operational risks, both near term and long term, dominate 
the risk profile composition over macroeconomic and 
strategic risks. 
Looking to 2024, eight of the top 15 risks are operational in 
nature and four are macroeconomic. Looking out 10 years, 
eight of the top 15 risks are operational in nature and the 
remaining seven are split between macroeconomic and 
strategic risks.
The largest elevated risk rankings for 2024 reflect a 
broad focus. 
The four largest elevated risk rankings are the following 
(five risks tied for fifth and are not listed):
From
(2023)
To
(2024)
Third-party risks 
17th 
4th 
Sustaining customer loyalty and 
retention
25th 
12th 
Cyber threats
15th 
3rd
Heightened regulatory changes and 
scrutiny
16th 
5th 
These increased risk ratings reflect elevated concerns on 
various strategic and operational fronts and underscore 
the increasing complexity of the evolving risk landscape.
17

There is significant churn in the top risks near-term. 
Six of last year’s top risks looking out 12 months fell out of 
this year’s top 10 list for 2024. 
From
(2023)
To
(2024)
Resistance to change 
4th 
14th 
Managing uncertainty surrounding 
supply chain ecosystem
5th 
19th
Impact of changes in work 
environment on culture
6th 
15th 
Culture not supporting timely 
escalation of risks 
8th 
17th 
Managing workforce expectations of 
hybrid work environment
9th 
24th 
Not sufficiently resilient or agile 
responding to a crisis
10th 
16th 
These risk issues were replaced with risks associated with 
cyber threats, third-party risks, heightened regulatory 
changes and scrutiny, exposure to nimbler competitors 
(including those that are either “born digital” or investing 
heavily to leverage technology for competitive advantage), 
changes in the interest rate environment, and ensuring 
data privacy and compliance with proliferating identity 
protection expectations and regulations. 
The five largest elevated rankings in risks looking out 10 
years are also mixed.
The five largest elevated rankings in risks looking out 10 
years are summarized below (two risks tied for fifth):
From
(2023)
To
(2024)
Cyber attacks 
13th 
1st 
Third-party risks
15th 
6th 
Impact of changes in work 
environment on culture
22nd
14th 
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts 
and political instability
31st
23rd
Growing focus on climate change 
and other sustainability policies, 
regulations, and expanding disclosure 
requirements as well as expectations 
of key stakeholders
20th
13th
Change in current interest rate 
environment
26th
19th 
The above risks reflect a mix of macroeconomic, strategic 
and operational concerns. Interestingly, the reference 
to geopolitical shifts and regional conflicts presages the 
developments in the Middle East commencing in the last 
week our survey was open. As indicated earlier, we noticed 
an uptick in this risk during that week.
The top 10 risks for both 2024 and a decade later (2034) 
are highlighted in the charts that follow. As indicated by 
the red arrows, three of the top 10 risks for 2024 are rated 
higher than they were for 2023, and nine of the 10 top risks 
for 2034 are higher than last year’s survey that also looked 
out a decade. Eight of the top 10 risks for 2024 remain top 
10 risk concerns a decade from now.
18

Top 10 risks for 2024
1. Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
5.96
2. Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts 
in labor expectations, and address succession challenges
5.93
3. Cyber threats 
5.90
4. Third-party risks 
5.63
5. Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.61
6. Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short 
supply 
5.52
7. Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet 
performance expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
5.51
8. Change in current interest rate environment
5.48
9. Increases in labor costs 
5.48
10. Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity 
protection expectations 
5.43
Top 10 risks for 2034
1. Cyber threats 
6.44
2. Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts 
in labor expectations, and address succession challenges
6.27
3. Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short 
supply 
6.16
4. Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and 
emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
6.15
5. Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.13
6. Third-party risks 
6.00
7. Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
5.95
8. Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet 
performance expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
5.91
9. Increases in labor costs 
5.87
10. Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market 
intelligence and increase productivity and efficiency 
5.79
19

A series of calls to action
The ever-changing risk landscape and the overall perceived 
magnitude and severity of risks should prompt boards 
and senior executives to scrutinize closely the approaches 
they use to remain focused on emerging risk issues and 
to integrate those insights into strategic decision-making. 
Now may be an opportune time for boards and C-suites 
to examine closely where to invest not only to preserve 
market image and branding but also foster a strong 
recovery when the economy bounces back and prospects 
for growth improve.
Given the long-term risk landscape, the question arises: 
What steps should be undertaken or continued over the 
near term to ensure the organization is sufficiently agile 
and resilient to thrive in a decade of disruption?
To help facilitate consideration of next steps, we present 
the following calls to action that executives and directors 
can consider when evaluating their organization’s readiness 
for the future as they cope with near-term business 
realities. We have centered these calls for actions along 
these key themes:
	• Navigating an uncertain economic environment
	• The cyber issues executives should be thinking about 
	• Forging ahead with artificial intelligence capabilities
	• Embracing new talent strategies
	• Understanding and managing the geopolitical risk 
landscape
These calls to action are not intended to be a 
comprehensive list of themes. They highlight issues 
common to most organizations that are worthy of further 
consideration and analysis. We also include a diagnostic 
in this report to assist companies in evaluating how they 
approach risk management and oversight in the digital 
age. It can be used to identify areas in which to improve 
risk assessment and risk management processes.
20

Navigating an uncertain economic environment in 2024
BY CHRIS WRIGHT
GLOBAL LEADER, BUSINESS PERFORMANCE IMPROVEMENT SOLUTIONS, PROTIVITI
Despite continued optimism in some quarters that a severe 
recession can be avoided and recent evidence that the pace of 
inflation may be slowing, our survey results show the economy 
as the top risk entering 2024. Because no one knows for sure 
what’s going to transpire, we expect this risk to continue to be 
on the minds of executives throughout 2024. A fluid inflation 
dynamic leaves the market with uncertainty about the 
direction of central bank policies, geopolitical transitions that 
could make inflation sticky and the reality that many leaders 
haven’t faced an inflationary economy in their entire careers.
Following are recommended steps for navigating this 
uncertain environment. 
Focus on generating reliable information for decision-
making. Companies should deploy multiple, reliable and 
objective sources of historical and forecasted economic, 
inflation and related capital markets data. Key performance 
indicators and reliable reporting on customer, supplier, 
employee, lender, competitor and investor actions should 
be developed. Data sources should be given the same 
rigorous review management would ordinarily give to 
inbound and outbound cash flow requests. They deserve 
that high of a priority.
Build a reliable forecasting (and reforecasting) capability. 
An inflationary and uncertain economic environment 
merits a dynamic forecasting and budgeting process. It 
should consider such market-driven factors as: 
	• Impact of the economy on customer buying behaviors; 
	• Inflationary pressures on labor costs and employee 
mobility; 
	• Inflationary pressures on critical materials, components 
and supplies; and 
	• Inflation-fighting monetary policy impacts on the cost of 
capital.
The forecasting and planning process should be objective 
and as free of bias and unplausible assumptions as possible. 
Quality real-time market data deters excessive reliance on 
historical data and trends when those trends may not hold 
up in the face of new and emerging realities. Alternative 
scenarios of alternative futures enable stress tests of top-
line performance, operating costs and cash flows. 
Monitor your (and your customers’ and vendors’) financial 
strength, credit capacity and behavior. Depending on the 
magnitude of a downturn, should one occur, companies should 
prepare and undertake a hierarchy of initiatives to manage 
margins through headcount reductions; compensation 
adjustments; reductions in selling, general and administrative 
expenses; cessation of expansion plans; effective hedging 
strategies; and discontinuance of underperforming 
operations, products and services. They should monitor and 
enforce approaches to minimizing customer credit losses. 
They should also have a “Plan B” (or B, C and D) for sourcing 
critical materials, components and supplies in the event of 
economic disruptions of the supply chain. Finally, they should 
understand where they stand with lenders and shareholders 
with intention to preserve financial health.
Don’t forget your employees. With the economy and 
inflation having an impact on employee anxiety, satisfaction 
and termination/retention decisions, straight talk and 
transparent communications are necessary to preserve 
morale and trust. No news does not necessarily mean good 
news. Of particular importance is the impact of economic 
forecasts, company operating performance and inflation on 
compensation expectations.
In uncertain times, the above steps will help executives and 
directors develop a response plan to deal with economic 
headwinds. Created in the cool of the day, the company will 
be more prepared and resilient should a downturn occur.
21

The cyber issues executives should be thinking about in 2024
BY SAMEER ANSARI
GLOBAL LEADER, SECURITY AND PRIVACY PRACTICE, PROTIVITI
As organizations continue to push their digital agenda, their 
data proliferates across the enterprise as well as outside 
their physical boundaries, and their attack surface continues 
to expand, cybersecurity presents a top-of-mind risk for 
executives and directors. Rather than rehash the table stakes 
of a strong cybersecurity framework, we offer the following 
actions for leaders to consider as they enter 2024. 
Understand the substantial threat of ransomware. As 
companies focus on defending and protecting themselves 
against ransomware attacks, they also need to understand 
their resiliency and ability to restore systems to not 
only become operational on a timely basis but also to 
demonstrate that any attack would not be a threat to their 
partners’ environments. Partners sharing their network 
connections and data need to be convinced that malicious 
payloads wiped from the company’s environment are not a 
threat to theirs (and vice versa).
Identify and retain cybersecurity talent. As more 
businesses move toward digitization, the need to protect 
against cyber threats and have the right talent in place to 
set and execute the cybersecurity framework becomes 
increasingly important. This reality requires businesses 
to think about their cybersecurity talent strategy. To that 
end, many organizations are considering outsourcing or 
leveraging cybersecurity managed services from other 
organizations to buy the talent that they may not be able 
to hire on their own. This approach allows them to focus on 
defining the capabilities they really need in-house. 
Learn the generative AI threat landscape. Generative AI 
can fuel more sophisticated attacks. Executives and boards 
are paying attention to this area through different angles. 
One is establishing appropriate governance and security 
around generative AI tools that are being created and used 
to drive the business strategy. The other is understanding 
how bad actors are using these tools to create complex 
attacks on organizations and leveraging vulnerabilities at 
an alarming pace to outsmart defenses. The time is now 
for organizations to think about how they can leverage 
generative AI to aid in identifying attacks and establishing 
more effective automated mitigation capabilities. 
Assess proliferating cybersecurity and privacy 
regulations. While a risk-based approach is best practice 
in addressing cyber threats, there is an increasing focus 
on additional regulations requiring cybersecurity breach 
disclosures and various privacy regulations intended to 
protect consumers and individuals. Additional regulations 
related to AI, much like the recent executive order in 
the United States, are driving organizations to map their 
existing control environment against these evolving 
requirements and establish new policies and controls to 
address any gaps that may exist. Expect executives and 
boards to push their organizations to establish defensible 
positions related to these regulations, while also making 
sure they don’t obstruct their business strategy. 
Keep an eye on quantum computing’s impact on cyber. 
The rise of quantum computing has the ability to render 
obsolete existing cryptography methods. This is an area 
where organizations are starting to evaluate their strategy 
around encrypting data and establishing innovations to 
deploy quantum-resistant cryptography to secure against 
attacks that are backed by quantum computing’s increased 
computing power.
22

Forging ahead with artificial intelligence capabilities in 2024
BY CHRISTINE LIVINGSTON
GLOBAL LEADER, ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE SERVICES, PROTIVITI
A global IBM survey of 3,000 CEOs indicated that half (50%) 
are already integrating generative AI (GenAI) into digital 
products and services. Many are also concerned about 
data security (57%) and bias or data accuracy (48%). Only 
28% have assessed the potential impact of GenAI on their 
workforces, and 36% plan to do so in 2024. Interestingly, 
seven of 10 non-CEO senior executives report that their 
organization is not ready to adopt GenAI responsibly. With 
this backdrop, following are steps leaders should take:
Identify opportunities for AI and GenAI now. Despite the 
challenges and uncertainties of GenAI, business leaders 
should be eager to seize the opportunities offered or else 
risk their businesses being disrupted. The risk of doing 
nothing is greater than the risk of doing something. 
Authorize an autonomous cross-functional team to review 
opportunities and formulate a strategy. Empower it with a 
shared vision giving it purpose, e.g., improve the customer 
experience or reimagine operational processes. In addition 
to thinking big and being disruptive, the team should:
	• Be multidisciplinary, while being nimble enough to 
support rapid decision-making;
	• Explore how GenAI is being used across industries; 
	• Identify practical opportunities that are aligned with 
overall business objectives and the stated vision for AI 
and can drive meaningful business value; and 
	• Educate key individuals at an appropriate depth 
according to their expected contributions, and put the 
onus on these individuals to educate a larger group of 
people in the organization.
Absent significant expertise in GenAI capabilities, 
increasingly corporations are seeking external assistance 
to guide initiatives and support initial development.
Establish a framework for evaluating use cases and 
managing risk. Once the team has defined potential concepts 
and use cases, each should be evaluated for feasibility 
and complexity while also considering the availability of 
technologies to achieve desired outcomes. The team should:
	• Evaluate the business benefit, architectural 
requirements, data integrations, security issues, and 
governance and compliance implications; 
	• Develop specific value measures expected from 
each selected pilot use case, with an eye for future 
unanticipated value; and
	• Outline an anticipatory road map to optimize investments 
and visualize correlations and reusability across use cases.
Leveraging GenAI capabilities requires leaders to develop 
ethical and responsible governance frameworks (to, among 
other things, ensure appropriate human involvement in critical 
decisions) and begin the journey with innovative pilots. 
Initiate pilots to confirm viability and demonstrate value. 
The team should facilitate the creation of AI-enabled 
prototypes to confirm that the concepts identified are 
technically viable, the data is sufficient, and that they 
demonstrate a path to delivering business value, exploring 
and tuning the model(s) iteratively to deploy pilot solutions. 
Establish business value metrics and KPIs to benchmark 
and monitor. Automating metrics and monitoring enables 
data-driven decisions about subsequent enhancements 
and possible future AI initiatives. Evaluations of the 
development process and the application itself result in 
improvements as the iterative process continues. 
Understanding the opportunities, limitations and risks 
of these models is a strategic imperative. Companies will 
be most successful and unleash the most potential when 
infusing GenAI capabilities with their own proprietary data 
and documents.
23

Embracing new talent strategies in 2024 and beyond
BY FRAN MAXWELL
GLOBAL LEADER, PEOPLE ADVISORY & ORGANIZATIONAL CHANGE, PROTIVITI
Talent-related issues proliferate the top 10 global risks for 
both 2024 and the next decade. Attracting, developing and 
retaining top talent qualifies as a prevalent, pressing risk 
in an era when an organization’s people greatly influence 
how well it addresses other top risk concerns, including 
cyber threats, the adoption of digital technologies and 
advanced tools (e.g., generative AI), third-party risks, and 
organizational resilience and agility, among many others. 
This makes it imperative for boards, CHROs and other 
C-suite leaders to reinvent their talent strategies through 
the following actions:
Adopt a new talent mindset. Your organization cannot 
rely on the ability to “go hire more” data scientists, nurses, 
systems architects, AI specialists, or other in-demand talent 
whenever it wants. Such types of prized skills are not widely 
available. Nor can you afford the costs and culture risks 
associated with yo-yoing between hiring binges and layoffs. 
A modern talent mindset:
	• Focuses on the skills instead of roles or jobs;
	• Prioritizes the value talent generates over its cost;
	• Sources skills from a diverse and flexible talent pool of 
full-time employees, contract and temporary workers, 
expert external consultants, and managed services and 
outsourcing providers; 
	• Treats leadership development and succession planning 
as a shared responsibility among all leaders;
	• Leverages a resilient and innovative organizational 
culture as a recruiting and retention advantage.
Align the talent mindset with business strategy. As 
organizational performance becomes increasingly reliant 
on the quality of people and teams, it is crucial to ensure the 
talent strategy aligns with the business strategy. Both game 
plans should remain in lockstep as strategic objectives 
change and as new opportunities and threats arise with 
greater frequency. 
Take a talent inventory, assess, respond and repeat. 
Perform regular assessments of the organization’s talent 
and skills. Map these to the skills and talent required to 
achieve the organization’s short- and long-term business 
strategies. AI-driven workforce planning/design software 
and talent intelligence tools can produce detailed, real-
time views of all of the skills that reside throughout the 
enterprise. Evaluate these talent inventories based on their 
alignment with longer-term business objectives. When 
skill gaps arise, develop strategies to close them. Distill 
these assessments and corrective actions into the periodic 
reports the CHRO delivers to the board.
Institute rolling talent forecasts and analyze the financial 
impacts of talent scenarios. HR groups should take a page 
from FP&A teams by deploying a rolling forecast that focuses 
on the skills (in addition to headcounts) needed to execute 
strategic business objectives. By modeling the impact of 
different external factors (e.g., labor cost increases) and 
strategic changes (e.g., investing in generative AI) on the 
organization’s skills requirements, HR leaders, working 
closely with business leaders, can identify future skills needs 
and quantify the financial impact of various scenarios. 
Deploy new skills analytics. Measure and report on open 
positions, skills at risk, upskilling opportunities, DEI- and 
ESG-related metrics relevant to business objectives, 
and the health of the organization’s culture (e.g., well-
being indicators). These metrics help the C-suite monitor 
organizational effectiveness, which is the extent to which 
the workforce is delivering on strategic objectives.
24

Understanding and managing the geopolitical risk landscape
BY CAROL BEAUMIER
SENIOR MANAGING DIRECTOR, RISK AND COMPLIANCE, PROTIVITI
Geopolitical risks occur as a result of a shift in power, a 
conflict or a crisis. The effects of geopolitical risk may 
be political, economic, societal (including environment, 
health and safety), legal and regulatory. These risks also 
impact cybersecurity. With conflicts and tensions currently 
spanning multiple continents and recent and upcoming 
elections potentially reshaping global politics, the following 
are important considerations for the board and the C-suite:
Don’t think that you are isolated from geopolitical risk. 
Those affected by geopolitical risk include not only large 
multinational companies that may find themselves in the 
middle of the fray, but also midsize and smaller companies 
across the globe that may experience a wide range of 
downstream consequences, including but not limited to 
commodity prices or shortages. 
Stay informed. The complexities of the geopolitical 
environment may mean that general knowledge of world 
events is likely not sufficient to predict the consequences. 
Enlist the assistance of well-trained advisers who can 
offer advice based on experience, research and deeper 
market intelligence that may not be available to most 
individual companies. 
Include geopolitical risk in your enterprisewide risk 
assessment. Consider and evaluate, through scenario 
analyses, the potential implications of the changing 
geopolitical landscape for the business and for customers 
of the business. Keep in mind that comprehensive scenario 
analyses may require considering the consequences of 
more than one geopolitical event occurring simultaneously 
and that assessment of geopolitical risk must be dynamic. 
Develop contingency and resilience plans. Know what your 
course of action will be if geopolitical developments alter 
your business strategy or operations — at least plan for the 
developments that are most likely or that would have the 
most significant impact on your company. 
Be mindful of escalating legal, credit and reputation 
risks. Following the Russian invasion of Ukraine, Western 
allies quickly and in a heretofore unprecedented manner 
turned to economic sanctions in an effort to punish Russia 
for its actions. While there was broad agreement on the 
principles of whom and what should be sanctioned, national 
and regional sanction regimes rolled out the sanctions in 
different ways, creating significant compliance challenges 
and reputation risk for companies with direct Russian 
exposure or exposure through their customers. It is 
reasonable to expect that economic sanctions will continue 
to be used in other circumstances as public policy tools. 
And remember that sanctions imposed are often retaliated, 
creating legal and credit risk challenges for companies (or 
their customers) trying to unwind their exposure. 
Consider your response. How a company responds, or 
whether it responds at all, to geopolitical events has 
become a lightning rod for controversy and criticism. While 
every geopolitical event cannot be anticipated, the board 
and the C-suite should define in advance the circumstances 
that would prompt messaging about an event to the 
organization (i.e., internally) or to the broader market, and 
should outline the parameters of the response. 
Geopolitical risks are a global threat to business with no 
signs of abating in the near future. Managing these risks 
effectively should be a core competency for all businesses. 
25

What you need to know
Risk perceptions vary by organization size: For 2024, 
organizations perceive a slight decrease in risk magnitude and 
severity compared to 2023, but overall assessments are higher 
than two years earlier.
	• Concerns in 2024 about economic conditions, talent and 
cyber threats are common across all size groups.
	• Regulatory change is a top risk for larger organizations in 
2024 and is the top overall risk for this group looking out 
to 2034.
	• Third-party risks are notable for midsize organizations.
	• Smaller organizations face hurdles in adopting digital 
technologies due to the size of the talent pool.
	• Long-term risk concerns are higher than near-term 
concerns for organizations of all sizes.
	• Technology-themed risks dominate the list for the next 
decade.
Across executive positions, risks are expected to decrease 
somewhat in significance for 2024 relative to 2023, but are 
rated higher than 2022. CAEs have the highest perception of 
risk. CEOs and boards agree on the significance of risks. CFOs 
are the most optimistic.
	• Economic and talent concerns are common across all 
positions. 
	• Long-term risk concerns vary.
Most industries rate risks lower for 2024, but overall concerns 
remain significant. Industry-specific risks vary.
	• There is marked contrast in perspectives across industry 
groups about specific risk concerns.
	• Cyber threats and talent concerns are common top five 
risks across most industries for both 2024 and 2034.
	• Most industry groups rank concerns about economic 
conditions, including inflationary pressures, as a top five 
risk concern for 2024.
	• Healthcare rates the most risks in 2024 as “Significant 
Impact.”
Views on risks and risk levels vary across regions. Succession 
planning and talent concerns are common issues. Cyber 
threats and economic conditions are top risks. Strategic risk 
concerns are more common long-term.
Public companies report increased risks for 2024. Top risks 
are reasonably consistent across entity types, with the most 
distinctive risk profile being private companies with plans to 
go public. Not-for-profit and government entities have high 
risk concerns. Long-term risks increase for all types, with cyber 
threats, rapid speed of digital innovations and the need to 
upskill to deploy digital technologies as the top concerns.
Investment in risk management is not likely to be higher in 
2024 than 2023.
	• Boards and executives need to adapt to the changing risk 
landscape and increase transparency.
What’s next: Boards and executives need to evaluate their risk 
management approaches and monitor and address emerging 
risks proactively.
Highlights of key differences across subsets of respondents
26

In addition to presenting overall risk insights from the 1,143 
respondents, later sections of this report provide insights 
from the analysis of findings across different dimensions, 
including size of organization, the leadership positions of 
respondents in the organization, industry group, geographic 
regions, and organization type (public, private, not-for-
profit or government).
Differences across sizes of 
organizations
	• Organizations of all sizes perceive a slight decrease in 
the magnitude and severity of risks in 2024 for their 
organizations in comparison to 2023, but their overall 
assessments of magnitude and severity of risks are higher 
relative to two years earlier. While this suggests some 
general improvement in risk conditions, in general caution 
still remains. Organizations with revenues between $100 
million and $999 million perceive their overall business 
environment to be riskier relative to all other sizes of 
organizations, with an impact score of 6.52.
	• What is striking for 2024 is the generally higher level 
of risk concerns for the two categories of smaller 
organizations (those with revenues below $1 billion). In 
both categories, respondents rated all of their top five 
risks as higher in 2024 relative to 2023. Collectively, 
this suggests smaller-sized organizations perceive the 
risk environment as more impactful for them near term 
relative to larger organizations.
	• Three risks are common top five risks across all size 
groups for 2024: (1) Concerns about attracting and 
retaining talent, including succession challenges; (2) 
concerns that economic conditions (and inflationary 
pressures) in markets served may affect growth and 
profitability; and (3) concerns about cyber threats. 
Except for the largest-sized organizations, concerns 
about economic conditions represent the top- or second-
ranked risk across all organizations, while attracting 
talent and cyber threats are of greater concern for 
the largest organizations. Cybersecurity concerns are 
higher in the top five list of risks for the two largest-sized 
organization categories relative to smaller organizations. 
The visibility of larger organizations may make them a 
greater potential target for cyber disruption.
	• Concerns about heightened regulatory changes and 
scrutiny are a top five risk for the two largest size 
categories of organizations for both 2024 and looking 
out to 2034. The higher impact of this risk on larger 
organizations may be linked to recent regulations 
related to the climate-related disclosure rules in the 
European Union (and pending SEC climate disclosure 
rules in the United States) as well as required cyber 
breach disclosures, potential expansion of attestation 
requirements, and other matters that the largest 
organizations perceive affect them the most. 
	• Third-party risks made the list of top five risk concerns 
for the two organization size groups in the middle range 
for 2024. Perhaps reliance on third-party partners and 
“Current economic conditions are proving 
to make short- and long-term outlooks as 
difficult to predict as they have been at any 
time over the past 50 years. Unemployment 
rates continue to hover near historic lows 
and consumer spending remains robust, 
despite traditional indicators such as 
inflationary trends and higher interest rates 
that would suggest the opposite should be 
happening. Given the level of uncertainty 
for the foreseeable future, especially with 
a volatile geopolitical climate further 
clouding economic forecasts, boards and 
management need to focus on assessing 
the right data, metrics and KPIs to assess 
the health of their business on a continuous 
basis and pivot with agility when necessary.”
DR. PETER HENRY 
SENIOR FELLOW, HOOVER INSTITUTION & FREEMAN 
SPOGLI INSTITUTE, STANFORD UNIVERSITY; INDEPENDENT 
DIRECTOR; PROTIVITI ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER
27

vendors is more notable for these organizations as they 
seek growth opportunities over time. 
	• The two categories of smaller-sized organizations rated 
perceived lack of skills needed for their adoption of 
digital technologies as a top five risk. Given the size of 
the talent pool, smaller organizations may face greater 
hurdles in embracing emerging innovation as they 
compete for talent to help them leverage the advantages 
and fully realize the value proposition offered by new 
innovation opportunities.
	• The differences in perceptions about long-term (2034) 
risk conditions relative to near-term (2024) risk 
concerns is noticeable. In each of the four organization 
size categories, respondents rated all top five risks at 
“Significant Impact” levels, suggesting that their concerns 
about 2034 are of a higher risk level relative to their near-
term risk concerns. Additionally, the two smaller size 
categories of organizations rate all of their top five long-
term risks higher than their assessments of long-term 
risks revealed in last year’s study. Clearly, respondents are 
expressing greater pause about long-term outlooks this 
year relative to their outlooks last year. 
	• Technology-themed risks seem to dominate the list of 
top risks for a decade from now. All sizes of organizations 
rate cyber threats as a top five risk, with all except the 
very largest size category rating that concern as their 
number one risk issue. Concerns about the ability to 
adopt emerging digital technologies also is in the top five 
risks for all organizations, and risks related to the rapid 
speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and 
emerging technologies made the top five risks for all sizes 
of organizations, except the smallest size category.
Differences across executive positions 
represented
	• The overall impression across different executive 
positions with respect to the magnitude and severity 
of risks in the environment is that risks are decreasing 
for 2024 over 2023. The one exception is for chief audit 
executives (CAEs), whose assessment did not change 
between 2023 and 2024. It is worth noting that CAEs 
have the highest perception of the magnitude and 
severity of risks relative to all other executive positions. 
While there is a decrease in risk levels from last year, 
most executive positions rate the overall magnitude 
and severity of risk conditions for 2024 to be at the 
“Significant Impact” level. Thus, the risk environment 
continues to be an important overarching issue for 
executives and boards to navigate. Only chief strategy/
innovation officers (CSOs) and chief data/digital officers 
(CDOs) rate the magnitude and severity of overall risk 
conditions below that level for 2024. 
	• While CEOs rate the overall magnitude and severity of 
risk conditions for 2024 higher than board members 
do, both rate that overall concern at the “Significant 
Impact” level. There is general agreement in the relative 
significance among specific risks between CEOs 
and boards, given all of the 36 risks are rated at the 
The overall impression across 
different executive positions 
with respect to the magnitude 
and severity of risks in the 
environment is that risks are 
decreasing for 2024 over 2023.
28

“Potential Impact” level (4.51 through 5.99) by both 
CEOs and boards, except for one risk that CEOs rate at 
the “Less Significant Impact” level (4.50 or lower). 
	• Chief risk officers (CROs), CAEs and chief human 
resources officers (CHROs) see individual risks 
differently for 2024, with each executive position rating 
at least five of the 36 risks for 2024 at the “Significant 
Impact” level, whereas no other executive position 
rates risks at that level of impact. Interestingly, there is 
variation across those three groups as to the risks that 
rank at that level, suggesting they see differences in the 
relative significance of specific risks. CFOs are the most 
optimistic about 2024, given they rate nine of the 36 
risks at the “Less Significant Impact” level.
	• Most positions identify risks related to attracting and 
developing talent and risks related to the economy 
as top five risks, with eight of 10 executive positions 
including those two risks in their top five risk concerns. 
Interestingly, CHROs did not include concerns related 
to attracting talent as a top five risk concern. CSOs and 
CDOs are the only two positions to not identify the 
economy as a top five risk issue.
	• There is general agreement among boards and CEOs in 
the specific issues included in their top five risks in 2034, 
given four of the top five risks are the same for both 
positions. CFOs have somewhat differing views about 
the top risks compared to boards and CEOs, given CFOs 
are the only one out of those three positions to highlight 
concerns related to labor costs and the changing current 
interest rate environment as top five risk issues. This is 
not surprising as CFOs are always focused on market 
factors that can impact the bottom line. CEOs are the 
only ones among those three positions to identify risks 
related to heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny, 
reflecting their sensitivity to potential constraints on the 
business model and strategy. 
	• For a decade out (2034), overall risk perceptions 
exhibit significant variation relative to 2024. Board 
members rate three of their top five risk issues at the 
“Significant Impact” level, while CEOs, CFOs and CROs 
rate none of their top five risks at that level. CAEs 
have the most concern about the future, rating 15 
risks at the “Significant Impact” level, including eight 
of the 14 operational risks — an important point given 
that operations are a key point of focus in many audit 
plans. The 2034 results show an increase in overall risk 
concerns relative to short-term risk concerns. 
	• As noted earlier, there is general agreement in long-term 
top five risks for boards and CEOs, with technology-
themed risks comprising three of their top five risk issues. 
Additionally, all executive positions — except CFOs — 
include cyber threats as a long-term top five risk, with 
six of 10 positions rating that risk in the number one or 
two position for a decade later. Eight of 10 executive 
positions also include concerns about the adoption of 
digital technologies requiring skills in short supply as a top 
five risk concern 10 years from now. Six of 10 positions 
include concerns about the rapid speed of disruptive 
innovation as a top five long-term risk concern.
“It should be of no surprise to find that 
talent and workforce issues are prevalent 
themes in the lists of top risks for 2024 
and the next decade. From retention 
and succession planning challenges 
to upskilling to meet the next wave of 
innovations and emerging technologies, 
organizations face mounting concerns 
that they will be unable to bring in the 
talent and skills needed to compete. 
Compounding these challenges is the 
approaching wave of retirement of a baby 
boomer generation of people that will 
leave a sizable gap in the workforce.”
DAME INGA BEALE 
INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR,
PROTIVITI ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER
29

Differences across industry groups
	• Most industry groups rate the overall magnitude and 
severity of risks for 2024 somewhat lower than their 
ratings for 2023, except for the Energy and Utilities 
and Manufacturing and Distribution industry groups, 
which rate 2024 risks higher than 2023. Despite slight 
reductions from prior year levels, respondents across 
all industry groups perceive the overall magnitude and 
severity of risks to be at the “Significant Impact” level, 
except for government-related entities. 
	• With the continuing transitions happening in the energy 
sector, it is not surprising that Energy and Utilities 
respondents believe that 2024 will be riskier than 2023, 
even though none of the 36 risks is rated by this industry 
group at the “Significant Impact” level and 10 are at 
the “Less Significant Impact” level (4.50 or lower). The 
rating of 10 of the 36 risks as “Less Significant Impact” by 
Energy and Utilities respondents is more than any other 
industry group.
	• There is a marked contrast in perspectives across industry 
groups about specific risk concerns, supporting the view 
that industry context is important to consider. But given 
that certain types of organizations’ business models may 
not fit neatly into a single industry category, reviewing 
differences in risk concerns across multiple industries may 
help tease out risks that otherwise could be overlooked.
	• Healthcare industry respondents rate the most risks at 
the “Significant Impact” level, with seven rated at that 
level for 2024. Four of their seven highest-rated risks are 
operational in nature, with specific concerns noted related 
to cyber threats, data privacy, third-party risks and 
talent shortages (most likely clinical healthcare workers, 
particularly nurses). Financial services respondents 
rate four of the 36 risks at the “Significant Impact” level, 
with two of those four relating to overall economic 
conditions and the current interest rate environment 
(both macroeconomic issues), one related to heightened 
regulatory scrutiny, and one related to cyber threats. 
	• Three of the seven industry groups rate cyber threats 
at the “Significant Impact” level: Financial Services; 
Technology, Media and Telecommunications; and 
Healthcare. Financial Services, Consumer Products 
and Services, and Healthcare are all concerned about 
economic conditions, including inflationary pressures. 
Financial Services and Healthcare are the two industries 
most concerned about heightened regulatory scrutiny.
	• All industry groups rate cyber threats as a top five risk 
concern, suggesting no industry is immune to those 
exposures. All industries, except Energy and Utilities 
and Government, include concerns about economic 
conditions, including inflationary pressures, as a top 
five risk concern for 2024. And all industries, except 
Financial Services, highlight concerns about the ability 
to attract, develop and retain talent as a top five risk 
concern for 2024. Increases in labor costs are of 
particular concern for Healthcare, Consumer Products 
and Services, and Government for 2024.
“The fact that cyber threats are a critical risk 
next year and in the next decade is not a 
new revelation, but it does not diminish its 
importance or the threats that cyber attacks 
pose, especially over the long term. Given 
the increasing sophistication of technologies 
used to execute these attacks and their 
expected maturity by 2034, and particularly 
considering the rise of AI, most organizations 
likely see a cyber attack and/or breach as 
an inevitability. The question becomes what 
organizations should do about it. In short, 
they need the right people and skills to 
bolster cyber defenses, they need effective 
data governance and management practices, 
and they need to reduce or eliminate the 
technical debt that elevates their cyber risk.”
ADMIRAL DANELLE BARRETT 
INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR,
PROTIVITI ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER
30

	• The significance of risk concerns a decade out is 
noticeably higher than short-term risk concerns across 
the various industry groups. For five of the seven 
industry groups, all of the top five risks for 2034 are at 
the “Significant Impact” level. This is in contrast to the 
short-term outlook for 2024, where only one industry 
group (Healthcare) rated all top five risks at that level. 
	• Cyber threats are in the top five long-term risks for 
all industry groups, as are concerns about attracting, 
developing and retaining top talent, including succession 
challenges. Four of seven industry groups are concerned 
about heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny. That 
is the number one long-term concern for Energy and 
Utilities organizations. 
	• Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and 
weather phenomena is a top five long-term risk concern 
for Energy and Utilities organizations and Government 
Agencies. Consistent with prior years, the Energy 
and Utilities industry group rates a growing focus on 
climate change and other sustainability policies as 
a top risk concern. In addition, for the first time, the 
Manufacturing and Distribution industry group rated 
this risk as a top five long-term risk.
Differences across geographic regions
	• Globally, organizations from seven of the eight 
geographic regions in our study agree that the overall 
magnitude and severity of risks are of a “Significant 
Impact” nature for 2024. Four rate the overall severity 
and magnitude of risks for 2024 as higher than 2023, 
which is remarkable given that 2023 overall registered 
the highest result on this question we have observed in 
the 12 years we have conducted this study.
	• There are notable differences in views about risks around 
the globe, which is especially important for multinational 
organizations to consider. Respondents in North America, 
the Middle East and Africa rate at least three of their top 
five risks at the “Significant Impact” level, while Asia, India 
and Latin America do not rate any risks this highly.
	• There is variation in the nature and types of risks 
included in the top five risks for the eight geographic 
regions. Fifteen of the 36 risks appear as top five risks 
among the eight geographic regions and seven of the 
eight regions report at least three operational risks in 
their top five for 2024.
	• All eight geographic regions include concerns about 
succession planning and talent acquisition and retention 
as a top five risk, and three report it as their top-ranked 
risk concern for 2024. Macroeconomic risks related to 
economic conditions and cyber threats are both ranked 
in the top five risks in six of the eight regions.
	• Looking ahead to 2034, strategic risks become more 
common in the top five risk concerns. The two most 
commonly cited top five concerns, each appearing in 
seven of the eight regions, are the risk associated with 
the adoption of digital technologies with its implications 
to the reskilling and upskilling of existing employees and 
the risk associated with cyber threats.
The significance of risk concerns 
a decade out is noticeably higher 
than short-term risk concerns 
across the various industry groups.
31

Differences across public and non-
public entities
	• For the three types of entities — publicly traded, 
privately held with no IPO plans, and private companies 
with plans for an IPO — for which we have comparative 
data, only public companies report a slight increase in 
the overall magnitude and severity of risks for 2024. All 
five organizations rate that overarching concern at the 
“Significant Impact” level.
	• While we separately analyze publicly traded companies, 
privately held entities with plans for an IPO, privately 
held entities with no plans for an IPO, not-for-profit 
entities, and governmental organizations, we find that 
the top five risks across the five groups are reasonably 
consistent. Concerns related to succession planning 
and talent acquisition and retention are a top three 
risk concern for all groups. Concerns over economic 
conditions and cyber threats are in the top five list of 
risks for four of the five groups for 2024.
	• Public companies are concerned about uncertainties 
related to increased regulatory change and enhanced 
scrutiny, the current interest rate environment, and the 
adoption of digital technologies and the related need to 
reskill and upskill employees. Private entities hoping to 
soon go public rate all five of their top five risks at the 
“Significant Impact” level, while public companies do not 
rate any of their top five risks at that level.
	• Privately held entities with plans for going public are 
particularly concerned about organizational risk culture 
and privacy. Privately held entities (both those pursuing 
and not pursuing an IPO) also are focused on risks 
associated with third parties.
	• Not-for-profit entities rate all five of their top risks at the 
“Significant Impact” level. Governmental organizations 
rate three of their five top risks at this level. Challenges 
associated with escalating labor costs are of particular 
concern for both, with that risk appearing in the top five 
for both types of entities. 
	• Interestingly, when looking a decade ahead, there 
appears to be an overall heightened level of concern. All 
of the top five risks are rated at the “Significant Impact” 
level for 2034 for each type of organization, except for 
private companies with IPO plans. For this group, only 
one risk is rated this highly.
	• For 2034, all five organization groups are concerned 
about cyber threats, rating that risk in their top five. 
Except for private entities planning an IPO, all groups are 
also focused on risks for 2034 related to the rapid speed 
of disruptive innovations, succession challenges and 
talent acquisition and retention, and the need to upskill 
to deploy digital technologies. Private entities planning 
for an IPO are primarily concerned about risks related 
to growth strategies dependent upon M&A, increasing 
labor costs, third-party risks, and the effects of social 
media, along with cyber threats. 
Public companies are concerned 
about uncertainties related to 
increased regulatory change and 
enhanced scrutiny, the current 
interest rate environment, 
and the adoption of digital 
technologies and the related need 
to reskill and upskill employees.
32

Plans to improve risk management 
capabilities
In addition to asking respondents to rate each of the 36 
risks for 2024 and 2034, we asked them to provide insights 
about plans to enhance their organization’s risk management 
capabilities in the coming year. Here are some key insights:
	• In light of the finding that respondents report a decrease 
in their impressions about the magnitude and severity of 
overall risks for 2024 relative to the prior year, they also 
indicate a lower likelihood of deploying more resources 
to risk management in 2024 relative to 2023 (and 2022). 
This result is not too surprising, especially considering 
the increased investment that has likely already 
occurred due to learning experiences from navigating 
through the pandemic.
	• All groups of organizations based on size indicate they 
are less likely to strengthen their risk management 
processes in 2024 as compared to 2023. However, 
organizations of all sizes still rate this likelihood at 
6.0 or higher. In a similar vein, all executive positions 
signal a lessened need for increased investment in risk 
management in the coming year.
	• No industry group indicates an increased likelihood for 
investment in risk management from 2023 to 2024. The 
Financial Services industry group indicates the highest 
likelihood for 2024 (6.59). Energy and Utilities is the 
only industry group with a status quo outlook related to 
investment in risk management infrastructure, with the 
score declining by only a marginal amount from 2023 
(6.19) to 2024 (6.10).
	• Organizations based in Asia, Australia/New Zealand, 
and the Middle East indicate an increase in likelihood 
they will invest more in risk management capabilities in 
2024 relative to our 2023 results, with respondents in 
India reflecting the highest overall likelihood for greater 
investment (a result that was also the case in 2023).
	• All types of entities indicate lower levels of likelihood 
that they will invest more time and energy in building out 
their risk management infrastructure in 2024 relative 
to 2023. This result applies for those organization types 
where we have comparative data for prior years. Still, 
all organization types report a likelihood of increased 
investment at the 6.0 level or higher.
The ever-changing risk landscape and the overall perceived 
magnitude and severity of risks should prompt boards 
and senior executives to scrutinize closely the approaches 
they use to keep an anticipatory eye on emerging risks. 
Unfortunately, some organizations continue to manage 
risks the way they have for many years, even though the 
profile of risks is changing dramatically as businesses and 
entire industries are transformed in the digital economy.
The need for greater transparency about the nature 
and magnitude of risks undertaken in executing an 
organization’s corporate strategy continues to be high 
as expectations of key stakeholders regarding strategic 
relevance, risk management and risk oversight remain 
strong. At the end of this report, we offer a number of 
diagnostic questions for executives and boards to consider 
as they evaluate their organizations’ approach to managing 
risks. It is our desire that this report will increase executive 
and board understanding of potential risks on the near- and 
long-term horizons. We also hope that this understanding 
will help leaders proactively navigate emerging issues and 
challenges for the benefit of their organization’s reputation 
and brand image, key stakeholders, and society as a whole.
The ever-changing risk landscape and 
the overall perceived magnitude and 
severity of risks should prompt boards 
and senior executives to scrutinize 
closely the approaches they use to keep 
an anticipatory eye on emerging risks.
33

The top risk concerns for 2024
What you need to know
By the numbers: Five of the top 10 risks are operational in 
nature, with four additional risks tied to macroeconomic 
concerns. Only one strategic risk falls in the top 10.
	• Three of the top 10 risks are rated higher than they 
were rated in 2023: cyber threats, third-party risks, and 
heightened regulatory change and scrutiny.
There are overarching concerns about economic conditions 
and ongoing inflationary pressures. 
Uncertainties persist about policy decisions among central 
banks, coupled with concerns about the current interest rate 
environment.
	• These may reflect worries about how the overall economy 
may restrict growth opportunities and squeeze margins 
as operating costs and the cost of capital are higher 
relative to the past several years.
Talent concerns remain: There are challenges related to the 
labor market, particularly rising labor costs and difficulties 
in attracting unique skills needed to adopt emerging digital 
technologies successfully.
	• Ongoing frustrations around compensation, managing 
flexible work options and other workplace challenges 
continue to create challenges in attracting and retaining 
the right talent needed for strategic success. 
	• Higher labor costs impacting profitability expectations 
are being driven by robust employment and skilled labor 
shortages.
Five of the top 10 risks link to business process challenges. 
	• Technology-dependent operations to ensure appropriate 
cybersecurity and data privacy and protection are of 
concern. 
	• Recent high-profile cybersecurity events have drawn 
attention to the realities of how perpetrators can shut 
down operations, paralyzing an entity’s ability to deliver 
their core products and services.
There is unease about existing operations and legacy IT 
systems limiting an organization’s ability to adjust core 
business processes to compete against more agile “born 
digital” competitors.
The one strategic risk issue in the 2024 top 10 risks relates 
to heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny.
The list of top 10 global risks for 2024, as noted by 
all survey participants, appears in Figure 2, along 
with their corresponding 2023 and 2022 scores 
(for those risks included in the prior years’ surveys).
34

FIGURE 2
Top 10 risks for 2024
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.96
5.98
5.69
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.93
6.11
5.82
O
Cyber threats 
5.90
5.61
5.54
O
Third-party risks 
5.63
5.58
5.47
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.61
5.58
5.49
S
4
5
6
7
8
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.52
5.74
5.71
M
Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors 
5.51
5.63
5.46
O
Change in current interest rate environment
5.48
5.70
5.02
M
Increases in labor costs 
5.48
5.92
5.59
M
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.43
5.65
5.34
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
35

It is interesting that five of the top 10 risks are operational 
in nature, with four additional risks tied to macroeconomic 
concerns. Only one of the top 10 risks is of a strategic nature. 
Consistent with the prior year study where only one of the 
top 10 risks was rated as a “Significant Impact” risk, none 
of the top 10 risks for 2024 is rated at that level. Three of 
the top 10 risks for 2024 are rated higher than they were 
in 2023: cyber threats, third-party risks, and heightened 
regulatory change and scrutiny.
Overarching concerns about economic conditions, 
particularly worries about ongoing inflationary pressures, 
are top of mind for executives for 2024. Uncertainties 
about policy decisions among central banks, coupled with 
concerns about the current interest rate environment 
(which also made the top 10 risks — ranked eighth — for 
2024), may reflect executive worries about how the overall 
economy may restrict growth opportunities and squeeze 
margins as operating costs and the cost of capital are 
higher. Indeed, many executives must now operate in an 
environment of higher interest rates and inflation that they 
may have never faced before. 
Macroeconomic challenges related to the labor 
market, particularly rising labor costs and difficulties in 
attracting unique skills needed to adopt emerging digital 
technologies successfully, add to economic concerns for 
global executives in 2024. Ongoing frustrations around 
compensation, managing flexible work options, mental 
health issues and other workplace challenges continue 
to create challenges in attracting and retaining the right 
talent needed for strategic success. Employee workplace 
expectations continue to evolve, union bargaining power 
is increasing and respondents are concerned that the 
organization may not be able to adjust appropriately 
to compete in the highly competitive talent and skilled 
labor marketplace. This continues to create challenges 
for organizations as they attempt to determine their 
long-term strategies for talent acquisition and retention. 
Understandably, there are concerns about higher labor 
costs impacting profitability expectations.
Operational risks dominate the top 10 list of risks for 2024, 
with five of the top 10 risks linked to business process 
challenges. Technology-dependent operations, especially 
those related to ensuring appropriate cybersecurity and 
data privacy and protection, are of concern for executives, 
especially as expectations and regulations continue to 
increase surrounding the protection of systems and data. 
Recent high-profile cybersecurity events affecting name-
brand entities, coupled with increased regulations in the 
United States surrounding disclosure requirements related 
to cyber events, have drawn attention to the realities 
of how perpetrators can shut down core operations, 
Employee workplace 
expectations continue to 
evolve, union bargaining 
power is increasing and 
respondents are concerned 
that the organization may not 
be able to adjust appropriately 
to compete in the highly 
competitive talent and skilled 
labor marketplace.
36

paralyzing an entity’s ability to deliver their core products 
and services until their demands, including ransomware 
payments, are met.
Concerns about existing operations and legacy IT systems 
limiting an organization’s ability to adjust core business 
processes to compete against more agile and nimble “born 
digital” competitors are adding to the overall operational 
risk profile on the minds of executives. To address these 
process limitations, many organizations are turning to third-
party partners, joint ventures, and IT service providers and 
cloud computing to respond to evolving market conditions 
more quickly. While addressing process limitations and 
resilience objectives, the increased reliance on third parties 
is leading to a different risk concern regarding how risks and 
vulnerabilities at the third party may actually impact the 
organizations that are dependent on them. In light of that, 
concerns about third-party risks zoomed into the top 10 list 
of risks for 2024, jumping from the 17th position in 2023 to 
the fourth position for the coming year.
The one strategic risk in the 2024 top 10 risks relates to 
heightened executive concern about regulatory change and 
scrutiny affecting the way their organization’s processes 
are designed and products or services are produced 
or delivered. For example, recently approved climate-
related risk disclosures for entities with operations in 
the European Union along with new and forthcoming 
climate-related disclosures for U.S. public entities, 
proliferating data privacy regulations, stronger focus on 
the timeliness and fairness of cyber breach disclosures, as 
well as industry-specific developments are significantly 
expanding expectations for aligning processes and 
emphasizing disclosure enhancements on a timelier basis. 
In other situations, rising societal and market participant 
expectations, even outside those of a rulemaking nature, 
are raising the bar for how organizations can do business in 
the competitive marketplace, e.g., sustainability reporting 
and widespread greenwashing and greenhushing concerns. 
Meeting those expectations can be costly and impactful to 
reputation, brand image and profitability goals.
Majority of respondents view most top 
10 risks as significant
Table 2 reveals the overall percentage of respondents who 
scored each of the top 10 risks at the “Significant Impact” 
(or “High) level (6.0 or higher), as well as the percentage of 
respondents who rate each as a 5.0 (“Medium”) or as 4.0 or 
below (“Low”) for 2024. This provides another perspective 
on the view of the top risk issues globally — the dispersion 
of the results distinct from individual average scores. The 
perception that the overall risk environment for 2024 
continues to be significant (an average of 6.35 on a 10-point 
scale) is supported by the fact that 50% or more of board 
members and executives rate all of the top five risks at the 
“Significant Impact” level (e.g., they chose 6, 7, 8, 9 or 10 on 
our 10-point Likert scale), with just under a majority rating 
the remaining top 10 risks at the “Significant Impact” level. 
This disparity suggests uncertainty around the extent to 
which these top risks have the potential to impact most 
organizations noticeably in the coming year.
Many organizations are turning to 
third-party partners, joint ventures, 
and IT service providers and cloud 
computing to respond to evolving 
market conditions more quickly.
37

TABLE 2
Top 10 risks (with percentages of responses by impact level) — 20241
Risk description
Type of risk
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
6 -10
5
1-4
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
Macroeconomic
58%
16%
26%
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
Operational
56%
17%
27%
Cyber threats 
Operational
56%
16%
28%
Third-party risks 
Operational
53%
17%
30%
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
Strategic
50%
17%
33%
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
Macroeconomic
50%
16%
34%
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
Operational
50%
18%
32%
Change in current interest rate environment
Macroeconomic
49%
17%
34%
Increases in labor costs 
Macroeconomic
49%
16%
35%
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations 
Operational
48%
18%
34%
1	 The risks presented in Table 2 are in the same top 10 risk order as reported in Figure 2. That list is based on each risk’s overall average score (using our 10-point scale). 
Table 2 merely reflects the percentage of respondents selecting a particular point (or range) on the 10-point scale.
38

Three-year comparison of risks
Each year, we provide an analysis of the overall three-year 
trends for the risks surveyed to provide insights about 
trending of individual risks. As discussed previously, to help 
identify differences in risk concerns across respondent type, 
we group all the risks based on their average scores into one 
of three classifications. Consistent with our prior studies, 
we use the following color-coding scheme to highlight risks 
visually using these three categories.
In Table 3, we summarize the impact assessments for each 
of the 36 risks for the full sample arranged by the three 
categories of risks we analyze: macroeconomic, strategic 
and operational. For each risk, the column labeled “2024 
Rank” indicates that risk’s relative position among the 36 
risks for 2024, with rank “1” representing the risk with the 
highest overall impact score for 2024.
Even though a majority of respondents rated all of the top 
five risks at the “Significant Impact” level, none of the 36 
risks is, on average, at the “Significant Impact” level when 
combining the ratings of all respondents for each risk. This 
is relatively consistent with the prior three years, where 
one in 2023, none in 2022 and only one in 2021 were 
rated at that level, even during the COVID-19 pandemic. 
The other 35 risk issues fall into the category of “Potential 
Impact” risks. None of the risks is rated at the lowest level 
(“Less Significant Impact”) for 2024, which is consistent 
with last year. This suggests that all of the 36 risks 
examined in this study represent highly relevant concerns 
to be considered by board members and executives.
Classification 
Risks with an 
average score of 
Significant Impact
6.0 or higher
●
Potential Impact
4.51 through 5.99
●
Less Significant Impact
4.5 or lower
●
“The shift in what comprises the 
top risk concerns for 2024 from 
prior years highlights the reality that 
conditions are constantly evolving, 
with new uncertainties unfolding on 
a continual basis. This calls for risk 
management processes that are 
nimble and ongoing and that focus on 
the speed at which different risks may 
evolve. Mere periodic risk management 
is insufficient in today’s rapidly 
changing environment.”
MARK BEASLEY 
PROFESSOR OF ENTERPRISE RISK MANAGEMENT, POOLE 
COLLEGE OF MANAGEMENT, NC STATE UNIVERSITY 
39

TABLE 3
Perceived impact for 2024 relative to prior years — full sample
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
2024 Rank
2024
2023
2022
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
1
●
●
●
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
6
●
●
●
Change in current interest rate environment
8
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs 
9
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in governmental regimes 
or expansion of global terrorism
20
●
●
●
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates 
23
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and compete 
27
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity 
30
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies 
34
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation 
36
●
●
●
40

Strategic Risk Issues
2024 Rank
2024
2023
2022
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5
●
●
●
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
12
●
●
●
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
13
●
●
●
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected crisis 
16
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth 
18
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure 
requirements as well as expectations of key stakeholders 
22
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology innovations 
25
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment 
26
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business 
28
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities 
31
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social issues that are polarizing 
33
●
N/A
N/A
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders 
35
●
●
●
41

Operational Risk Issues
2024 Rank
2024
2023
2022
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and address 
succession challenges
2
●
●
●
Cyber threats 
3
●
●
●
Third-party risks 
4
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance expectations as well as 
“born digital” competitors 
7
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations 
10
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase productivity and 
efficiency 
11
●
●
●
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting business model and core operations 
14
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work environment 
15
●
●
●
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely identification and escalation of emerging risk issues 
17
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
19
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena 
21
●
●
N/A
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part of a hybrid work 
environment 
24
●
●
●
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry 
29
●
N/A
N/A
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety of employees (including their well-being and 
mental health), customers, suppliers and our communities
32
●
●
●
42

Risks with largest increase from prior year
To highlight the most dramatic shifts in year-over-year perceptions, we also investigate which risks increased the most from 2023 to 2024. Only three of the 34 
risks2 that we surveyed in the prior year have average overall scores that are higher than the average scores in 2023. The 31 remaining risks decreased from 2023. 
In Table 4, we show the five risks that increased the most (or decreased the least) from 2023.
The two highest increasing risks for 2024 over 2023 are both operational risks related to cyber threats and third-party issues. The third risk that increased over the prior 
year is the strategic risk related to concerns about heightened regulatory change and scrutiny affecting the way products or services can be delivered to the market.
Risk description
2024
2023
Percentage 
change
Cyber threats 
5.90
5.61
5.27%
Third-party risks 
5.63
5.58
0.87%
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.61
5.58
0.51%
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
5.96
5.98
-0.38%
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
5.51
5.63
-2.16%
TABLE 4
The five risks with highest level of increase (or smallest decrease) — 2024 vs. 2023
2	 Recall that two new risks were added to this year’s survey.
43

Risks with largest decrease from prior year
Thirty-one risks decreased in severity in 2024 from 2023. The five risks that exhibited the largest percentage decrease are highlighted in Table 5.
TABLE 5
The five risks with highest level of decrease — 2024 vs. 2023
Risk description
2024
2023
Percentage 
change
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation 
4.62
5.54
-16.57%
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders 
4.64
5.34
-13.15%
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part of a 
hybrid work environment 
4.97
5.71
-12.93%
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
5.04
5.79
-12.87%
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities 
4.87
5.52
-11.78%
Three of the risks in Table 5 reflect concerns triggered by conditions tied to the pandemic. The decline regarding government policies and regulation suggests that 
respondents view COVID-19 as endemic in nature. The other two pandemic-related risks — managing expectations of the workforce and uncertainty surrounding 
supply chain issues — have subsided as the market has evolved and adjusted. Additionally, concerns related to M&A activities and to activist shareholders seem to 
be somewhat diminished for 2024 relative to 2023.
44

Longer-term perspective — overview of risks for 2034
What you need to know
A riskier long-term outlook: Executives rate nine of the top 
10 risks for 2034 higher than they rated the same risks last 
year as they looked a decade out.
Cyber threats are the top long-term risk issue, with a 
sizeable year-over-year increase in risk score.
Innovation and technology concerns dominate the top five 
risks for 2034. Executives are focused on whether their 
organizations can respond to rapidly emerging innovations 
that may disrupt their business models and operations.
Talent risks also stand out: Lack of ability to attract, 
develop and retain the talent needed to manage emerging 
technologies may significantly impede competitive 
capabilities in the marketplace. 
	• Those concerns reflect an overall worry about the ability 
to compete in the marketplace profitably in the long term. 
Eyeing the regulatory landscape: Executives and boards are 
focused on the potential for new regulations to emerge — 
related to social, privacy and environmental issues, among 
other changes — as expectations around what is deemed 
acceptable continue to shift. 
The interrelated nature of global risks: Despite efforts 
to retreat from globalization, organizations continue to 
operate in an interdependent but highly competitive global 
marketplace. Shifting global optics create fresh nuances and 
complexities in evaluating global risks.
Between the lines: There is significant overlap in the risk 
landscape when comparing the top 10 short-term risks 
(2024) with the long-term risks (2034). This continuity 
suggests short-term risk concerns may have a lingering 
impact on organizations over the next decade.
In addition to obtaining respondent perspectives 
about risks on the horizon for 2024, we asked 
them to provide insights about long-term impacts 
of those same risks over the next decade — 2034. 
The top 10 global risks for 2034 appear in Figure 
3, alongside scores from our two prior years (also 
looking out a decade ahead when asked).
45

Cyber threats 
6.44
5.78
5.36
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.27
6.18
5.88
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
6.16
6.11
6.00
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.15
6.04
5.79
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.13
5.83
5.63
S
4
5
6
7
8
Third-party risks 
6.00
5.75
5.40
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.95
5.84
5.67
M
Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors 
5.91
5.85
5.34
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.87
5.82
5.42
M
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics 
to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency
5.79
5.84
5.47
O
4
5
6
7
8
FIGURE 3
Top 10 risks for 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
46

What is striking about the long-term view of risks is that 
executives rate nine of the top 10 risks for 2034 higher 
than they rated the same risks last year as they looked a 
decade out. This suggests that concerns about long-term 
risks are greater than what they perceived last year. This is 
especially noticeable when viewing the sizeable increase 
in the perceived risk of cyber threats for 2034, which is the 
number one risk concern a decade out. 
Innovation, technology and related talent concerns 
dominate the top five risks for 2034. In addition to cyber 
threats making the top of the risk list, executives are also 
focused on whether their organizations will be able to 
respond to rapidly emerging innovations that can disrupt 
business models and the way they do business. Their lack 
of ability to attract, develop and retain the talent needed 
to manage emerging technologies may significantly impede 
their competitive capabilities in the marketplace. Those 
concerns, coupled with potential limitations tied to existing 
operations and legacy IT systems and increases in labor 
costs to retain the talent once acquired, reflect an overall 
worry about their abilities to compete in the marketplace 
profitably in the long term. Limited digital thinking and 
expertise, particularly in the C-suite, may make it difficult 
for the organization to compete in a digital marketplace. 
Furthermore, survey respondents are concerned about 
having the data analytics and “big data” capabilities to gain 
insights about customer experiences and markets to inform 
decision-making as well as take advantage of operational 
efficiency opportunities. Clearly, talent and technology 
concerns are intertwined over the long term.
Risks related to the escalation of regulatory changes 
and scrutiny, worries about growing dependencies on 
third-party relationships to do business, and long-lasting 
unfavorable economic conditions dominate the list of 
risk concerns for executives as they look into long-term 
horizons. Respondents are also focused on potential shifts 
in regulatory priorities and how changes in regulations 
might impact the way their organizations’ processes 
are designed and how their products are produced and 
delivered. As executives and boards look a decade out, 
they are focused on the potential for new regulations to 
emerge as expectations around what is deemed acceptable 
continue to shift. Perhaps, as these leaders reflect on 
rapidly shifting expectations over the last decade — or even 
recent years — related to social, privacy and environmental 
issues, among other changes, they are projecting ahead a 
similar noticeable shift as they keep a wary eye on potential 
scenarios and developments over the next decade.
But there is another important dimension to the long-term 
outlook — the running thread through this survey report 
regarding the interrelated nature of global risks. As noted 
in our commentary regarding the post-October 7 survey 
results, the attack on Israel resulted in an uptick in the risks 
rated after the war started. Despite efforts to retreat from 
globalization, the reality is that organizations continue to 
operate in an interdependent but highly competitive global 
marketplace. Shifting global optics create fresh nuances 
and complexities in evaluating global risks. 
There is quite a bit of overlap in the risk landscape when 
comparing the top 10 short-term risks (2024) with the long-
term risks (2034). Eight of the top 10 risks appear on both 
lists. Likewise, eight of the top 10 risks looking out 10 years 
last year are on this year’s list. This continuity suggests that 
the short-term risk concerns noted this year may likely have 
a lingering impact on organizations over the next decade. 
Table 6 highlights the two risks making the top 10 for 2034 
that were not in the top 10 for 2024. Strategic concerns 
related to the rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies (e.g., generative AI) 
and other market forces suggest executives are focused 
on ensuring their organizations can compete successfully 
by changing at the speed of the market. Respondents are 
also concerned about their organization’s inability to utilize 
rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence, 
connect with the customer experience, and identify 
operational and market efficiencies.
47

TABLE 6
Two risks for 2034 not in top 10 list for 2024
Risk description
2034
Rank
2034 
Response
2024
Rank
2024 
Response
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and 
emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
4
6.15
13
5.28
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market 
intelligence and increase productivity and efficiency 
10
5.79
11
5.42
Recall that risks with average scores of 6.0 or higher are 
classified as “Significant Impact” risks, while risks with 
average scores of 4.51 through 5.99 are classified as having 
a “Potential Impact.” Risks with average scores 4.5 or below 
are classified as having a “Less Significant Impact.” In Figure 
3, we see that six of the top 10 long-term risks are rated at 
the “Significant Impact” level looking out to 2034. This is 
in contrast to three of the top 10 risks rated at that level 
looking out 10 years last year and only one of the top 10 
long-term risks rated at that level the year before. These 
differences suggest heightened uncertainty a decade out 
relative to short-term concerns.
Table 7 presents the percentage of respondents who rate 
the top 10 risks into one of these three classifications. 
A majority of respondents rate all of the top 10 risks at 
the “Significant Impact” level for 2034. The fact that all 
are rated at the higher level for a decade out suggests 
respondents are especially concerned as they look at long-
term horizons.
A majority of respondents rate 
all of the top 10 risks at the 
“Significant Impact” level for 2034.
48

TABLE 7
Top 10 risks (with percentages of responses by impact level) — 20343
Risk description
Type of risk
HIGH
MEDIUM
LOW
6 -10
5
1-4
Cyber threats 
Operational
65%
15%
20%
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
Operational
61%
17%
22%
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
Macroeconomic
60%
17%
23%
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
Strategic
58%
17%
25%
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
Strategic
60%
16%
24%
Third-party risks 
Operational
58%
18%
24%
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
Macroeconomic
55%
20%
25%
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
Operational
54%
18%
28%
Increases in labor costs 
Macroeconomic
54%
20%
26%
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency 
Operational
50%
21%
29%
3	 The risks presented in Table 7 are in the same top 10 risk order as reported in Figure 3. That list is based on each risk’s overall average score (using our 10-point scale). 
Table 7 merely reflects the percentage of respondents selecting a particular point (or range) on the 10-point scale.
49

Table 8 shows the risks with the biggest differences 
between the 2024 and 2034 scores, with all of them 
reflecting increases in risk scores from 2024 to 2034. 
Interestingly, four of the five risks with the biggest 
differences in short-term versus long-term views (e.g., 
2024 versus 2034 average risk scores) represent strategic 
risk issues. Concerns related to disruptive innovations and 
emerging technologies, concerns that some innovations 
may lead to substitute products and services, and concerns 
about lower barriers for new market entrants make up the 
top three biggest increasing risks over the next decade. 
Risks related to the growing focus on climate change 
and other sustainability policies and regulations and the 
availability of skills needed to adopt emerging digital 
technologies are especially heightened for executives as 
they look out a decade.
TABLE 8
Five risks with largest positive differences between 2024 and 2034
Risk description
2024
2034
Percentage 
change
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies 
and/or other market forces (strategic)
5.28
6.15
16.40%
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business (strategic)
4.89
5.58
14.14%
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment 
(strategic)
4.91
5.59
13.91%
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as expectations of key stakeholders 
(strategic)
5.01
5.70
13.67%
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply (macroeconomic)
5.52
6.16
11.63%
50

Table 9 shows the average risk score for 2034 for each of the 36 risks included in our survey organized by risk category: macroeconomic, strategic and operational. Six of the risks are at the 
“Significant Impact” level as executives think about 2034. All other risks are at the “Potential Impact” level. None are at the “Less Significant Impact” level.
TABLE 9
Perceived impact for 2034 relative to prior years — full sample
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
2034 Rank
2034
2033*
2032*
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
3
●
●
●
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
7
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs 
9
●
●
●
Change in current interest rate environment
19
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism
23
●
●
●
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates 
26
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies 
28
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and compete 
30
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity 
34
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation 
36
●
●
●
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
51

Strategic Risk Issues
2034 Rank
2034
2033*
2032*
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
4
●
●
●
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5
●
●
●
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
12
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure 
requirements as well as expectations of key stakeholders 
13
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment 
16
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business 
17
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth 
20
●
●
●
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected crisis 
22
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology innovations 
24
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities 
27
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social issues that are polarizing 
29
●
N/A
N/A
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders 
32
●
●
●
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
52

Operational Risk Issues
2034 Rank
2034
2033*
2032*
Cyber threats 
1
●
●
●
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and address 
succession challenges
2
●
●
●
Third-party risks 
6
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance expectations as well as 
“born digital” competitors 
8
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase productivity and 
efficiency 
10
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations 
11
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work environment 
14
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena 
15
●
●
N/A
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting business model and core operations 
18
●
●
●
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely identification and escalation of emerging risk issues 
21
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
25
●
●
●
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry 
31
●
N/A
N/A
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment 
33
●
●
●
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety of employees (including their well-being and 
mental health), customers, suppliers and our communities
35
●
●
●
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
53

Analysis across different sizes of organizations
What you need to know
Important takeaway: Organizations of all sizes perceive a 
slight decrease in the magnitude and severity of risks in 2024 
for their organizations in comparison to 2023, but their overall 
assessments of magnitude and severity of risks are higher than 
two years earlier.
What is striking for 2024 is the general higher level of risk 
concerns for the two categories of smaller organizations, which 
rate all of their top five risks as higher in 2024 relative to 2023.
	• In contrast, none of the top five risks for the largest 
organizations are at the “Significant Impact” level, 
suggesting smaller-sized organizations perceive the risk 
environment as more impactful for them in 2024 relative 
to larger organizations.
Three risks are common top five risks across all size groups: 
1.	
Attracting and retaining talent, including succession 
challenges
2.	
Economic conditions and inflationary pressures 
3.	
Cyber threats
Heightened regulatory change and scrutiny is a top five risk 
for the two largest size categories of organizations. 
For the 2034 risk outlook, the differences in perceptions 
relative to near-term risk concerns for 2024 is striking. 
Across all sizes of organizations, respondents rate their top 
five long-term risks at higher levels than their 2024 outlooks. 
	• In each of the four size categories, respondents rate all 
top five risks at “Significant Impact” levels. 
	• Leaders must think in terms of multiple scenarios and how 
they may play out over time. While this thinking facilitates 
preparedness and a more robust strategic outlook, it also 
highlights their uncertainty in facing the future.
The bottom line: Notable long-term risks include cyber 
threats; adoption of emerging digital technologies; 
attracting, developing and retaining talent; and heightened 
regulatory changes and scrutiny.
Most recent fiscal year revenues
Number of 
respondents
Revenues $10 billion or greater
256
Revenues $1 billion to $9.99 billion
461
Revenues $100 million to $999 million
265
Revenues less than $100 million
161
Total number of respondents
1,143
The sizes of organizations, as measured by total 
organizational revenue, vary across our 1,143 
respondents, as shown in the accompanying table.
The mix of sizes of organizations represented by 
respondents is very similar to the mix of respondents in our 
prior years’ surveys. About 63% of our respondents are in 
larger organizations with revenues between $1B or higher.
54

FIGURE 4
Overall, what is your impression of the magnitude and 
severity of risks your organization will be facing with 
respect to achieving your performance goals over the 
next 12 months?
Revenues $10B or greater
6.44
5.92
6.33
Revenues $1B through $9.9B
6.75
6.23
6.32
Revenues $100M through $999M
6.78
6.37
6.52
Revenues less than $100M
6.71
6.15
6.21
4
5
6
7
8
The overall outlook about risk conditions differs across sizes of organizations. We asked 
respondents to provide their overall impression of the magnitude and severity of risks 
their organization will be facing using a 10-point scale where 1 = “Extremely Low” and 10 = 
“Extremely High.”
Organizations of all sizes perceive a slight decrease in the magnitude and severity of risks 
in 2024 for their organizations in comparison to 2023, but their overall assessments of 
magnitude and severity of risks are higher than two years earlier. This suggests some 
general improvement in risk conditions year-over-year, but caution still remains. In addition, 
all organizations indicate that the magnitude and severity of risks will be greater than 
6.0 and have a significant impact over the next 12 months. Organizations with revenues 
between $100 million and $999 million perceive their overall business environment to be 
riskier relative to all other sizes of organizations, with an impact score of 6.52.
2024
2023
2022
55

2024 risk issues
What is striking for 2024 is the general higher level of risk 
concerns for the two categories of smaller organizations 
(those with revenues below $1 billion). In both categories, 
respondents rated all of their top five risks as higher in 
2024 relative to 2023. Two of the top five risks are at the 
“Significant Impact” level for organizations with revenues 
between $100 million and $999 million, while three of the 
top five risks for organizations with revenues less than 
$100 million are at that level. In contrast, none of the top 
five risks for the largest organizations (revenues greater 
than $10 billion) is at the “Significant Impact” level, and 
none of the top five risks for organizations with revenues 
between $1 billion and $9.9 billion is rated at that level. 
Collectively, this suggests smaller-sized organizations 
perceive the risk environment as more impactful for them 
in 2024 relative to larger organizations.
Three risks are common top five issues across all size 
groups: (1) Concerns about attracting and retaining talent, 
including succession challenges; (2) concerns that economic 
conditions (and inflationary pressures) in markets served 
may affect growth and profitability; and (3) concerns about 
cyber threats. Except for the largest size organizations, 
concerns about economic conditions represent the first- 
or second-ranked risk across all organization sizes, while 
cybersecurity concerns are higher in the top five list of 
risks for the two largest-sized organization categories 
relative to the smaller categories. Perhaps their sizes may 
be perceived as increasing their visibility to cyber threat 
perpetrators who might seek to target more recognizable 
companies and brands in the marketplace.
Concerns about heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny 
are a top five risk for the two largest-size categories of 
organizations. Some of these regulations, such as the new 
climate-related disclosure rules in the European Union 
(and the SEC’s proposed climate disclosure rules) and other 
matters discussed earlier, come with expanded responsibilities 
for the largest organizations. The largest organizations are 
also especially concerned about risks related to their existing 
operations and legacy IT systems. That risk was not in the top 
five list of risks for all other sizes of organizations. 
Third-party risks make the list of top five risk concerns for 
organizations in the two middle ranges of organizational 
size. Perhaps reliance on third-party partners and vendors 
is more notable for these organizations as they seek growth 
opportunities over time. The two smaller-sized categories 
of organizations rate in their top five lists risks tied to a 
perceived lack of skills needed for their adoption of digital 
technologies. Smaller organizations may face greater 
hurdles in embracing emerging innovation as they compete 
for talent to help them leverage the advantages and value 
proposition offered by new technological advancements.
Smaller organizations may face 
greater hurdles in embracing emerging 
innovation as they compete for talent 
to help them leverage the advantages 
and value proposition offered by new 
technological advancements.
56

2034 risk issues
The differences in perceptions about long-term risk 
conditions relative to near-term risk concerns for 2024 
are striking. Across all sizes of organizations, respondents 
rate their top five long-term risks at higher levels than 
their 2024 outlooks. In each of the four size categories, 
respondents rate all top five risks at “Significant Impact” 
levels, suggesting that their concerns about 2034 are 
at a higher risk level relative to their near-term risk 
concerns. Additionally, the two smaller size categories of 
organizations rate all of their top five risks higher than 
their assessments of long-term risks in last year’s study. 
Clearly, respondents are expressing greater pause about 
long-term outlooks this year relative to those outlooks last 
year. This is not surprising. In an era of disruptive change, 
leaders must think in terms of multiple scenarios and how 
they may play out over time. While this thinking facilitates 
preparedness and a more robust strategic outlook among 
organizations, it also highlights their uncertainty in facing 
the future, often escalating perceptions of strategic and 
macroeconomic risks and, interestingly, even operational 
risks such as cyber threats and talent challenges.
Technology-themed concerns dominate the list of top 
risks for a decade from now. All sizes of organizations 
rate cyber threats as a top five risk, with all except the 
very largest size category rating that concern as their 
number one risk issue. Concerns about the ability to adopt 
emerging digital technologies also is in the top five risks 
for all organizations, and risks related to the rapid speed 
of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging 
technologies made the top five risks for all sizes of 
organizations, except the smallest size category. 
Talent concerns also remain a top risk for all sizes of 
organizations, as each category includes concerns 
related to their ability to attract, develop and retain 
talent, including succession challenges, as a top five risk. 
Uncertainty about heightened regulatory changes and 
scrutiny is top of mind for the two largest size categories 
of organizations, especially for the largest organizations 
(revenues of $10 billion or higher), which rank that 
concern as their top risk issue for 2034. Only the smallest 
organizations highlight concerns about privacy and data 
security and concerns about economic conditions as top 
five long-term risk challenges.
Figures 5-8 summarize the top-rated risks by size of 
organization separately for 2024 and 2034. Only the top 
five risks are reported for each year, along with prior year 
risk scores.
Technology-themed concerns 
dominate the list of top risks 
for a decade from now.
57

FIGURE 5A
Revenues $10B or greater — 2024
FIGURE 5B
Revenues $10B or greater — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.77
5.93
5.39
O
Cyber threats 
5.77
5.28
5.44
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.70
5.90
5.46
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.67
5.31
5.44
S
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as 
well as “born digital” competitors 
5.44
5.30
5.12
O
4
5
6
7
8
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.31
5.81
5.62
S
Cyber threats 
6.30
5.48
5.20
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
6.24
5.95
5.56
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.00
6.01
5.74
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.00
6.04
6.20
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
58

FIGURE 6A
Revenues $1B - $9.99B — 2024
FIGURE 6B
Revenues $1B - $9.99B — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.91
6.05
5.76
M
Cyber threats 
5.88
5.70
5.78
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
5.78
6.19
6.00
O
Third-party risks 
5.62
5.69
5.58
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.54
5.64
5.55
S
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.42
5.81
5.65
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.10
6.20
5.98
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.04
6.05
5.87
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.02
6.11
6.07
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.00
5.75
5.86
S
4
5
6
7
8
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
59

FIGURE 7A
Revenues $100M - $999M — 2024
FIGURE 7B
Revenues $100M - $999M — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.24
6.13
5.99
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.16
5.87
5.80
M
Cyber threats 
5.98
5.71
5.58
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.86
5.61
5.75
M
Third-party risks 
5.83
5.47
5.57
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.45
5.87
5.40
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.40
6.31
5.99
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
6.32
6.19
6.04
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.30
5.99
5.80
S
Third-party risks 
6.14
5.71
5.52
O
4
5
6
7
8
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
60

FIGURE 8A
Revenues less than $100M — 2024
FIGURE 8B
Revenues less than $100M — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.20
6.08
5.58
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.09
5.77
5.62
O
Cyber threats 
6.07
5.29
5.22
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.85
5.48
5.15
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.79
5.15
5.52
M
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.68
6.19
4.99
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.58
6.23
5.78
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
6.56
5.98
5.74
M
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
6.52
6.17
5.21
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.45
6.08
5.48
M
4
5
6
7
8
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
61

Analysis across executive positions represented
What you need to know
The big picture: Overall impressions across executive 
positions with respect to the magnitude and severity of risks 
in the environment are that the level of risk looking forward 
to 2024 has decreased in comparison to last year’s outlook 
for 2023.
	• In relation to our prior year results, almost every group 
of executives reduced the number of risks they rated as 
“Significant Impact.”
	• Most positions identify attracting and developing talent 
and economic conditions as top five risks.
	• There is variation in perspectives across different 
executive positions, which calls for more discussion 
among executive members to better understand how 
each group views the risk landscape and obtain a clearer 
view of the organization’s risk profile.
The next decade: Looking to 2034, overall risk perceptions 
exhibit significant variation relative to 2024. 
	• Board members rate three of their top five risk issues at 
the “Significant Impact” level.
	• CAEs have the most concern about the future, rating 15 
risks at the “Significant Impact” level. 
	• The 2034 results show an increase in overall risk concerns 
for 2034 relative to short-term risk concerns for 2024.
Key takeaway: The results reflect how different roles offer 
varying perspectives when assessing risks in disparate 
environments and over longer versus shorter time horizons.
Gathering diverse perspectives: The results illustrate the 
importance of bringing varying perspectives to the ERM 
process. 
	• Each executive needs to identify and assess risks in 
disparate environments and over longer versus shorter 
time horizons.
	• The board and management team should engage in 
dialogue regarding the most critical enterprise risks, 
given the different perspectives each brings to the table.
	• Without clarity of focus, the executive team may not be 
aligned both internally and with the board on what the top 
risks are. Worse, they may not be appropriately addressing 
the most important risks the organization faces.
We targeted our survey to individuals currently serving on 
the board of directors or in senior executive positions so 
that we could capture board and C-suite perspectives about 
risks on the horizon for 2024 and a decade later (2034). 
We received responses from 109 members of a board of 
directors, and it is reasonable to expect that some C-suite 
executives also serve on one or more boards. An additional 
100 respondents serve as CEOs for their organizations. As 
indicated in the accompanying table, 87 responses were 
received from individuals who did not fit within one of our 
executive categories. Their responses are included in the 
full sample of 1,143 but are not separately analyzed.
62

Executive position
Number of 
respondents
Board Member (Board)
109
Chief Executive Officer (CEO)
100
Chief Financial Officer (CFO)
105
Chief Human Resources Officer (CHRO)
42
Chief Risk Officer (CRO)
180
Chief Audit Executive (CAE)
193
Chief Information/Technology Officer 
(CIO/CTO)
131
Chief Strategy/Innovation Officer (CSO)
51
Chief Data/Digital Officer (CDO)
48
Other C-Suite4 (OCS)
97
All Other5
87
Total number of respondents
1,143
4	 This category includes titles such as chief operating officer, general counsel and chief 
compliance officer.
5	 These 87 individuals either did not provide a response allowing for classification by position 
or would best be described as middle management or business advisers/consultants. We do 
not provide a separate analysis for this category.
To determine if perspectives about top risks differ across 
executive positions, we separately examined responses 
received from board members and from nine executive 
positions. Similar to our analysis of the full sample and 
across the different sizes of organizations, we analyze 
responses about overall impressions of the magnitude and 
severity of risks across executive position held. The scores 
in Figure 9 reflect responses to the question about their 
overall impressions of the magnitude and severity of risks their 
organization will be facing using a 10-point scale where 1 = 
“Extremely Low” and 10 = “Extremely High.”
The overall impressions collectively across all executive 
positions with respect to the magnitude and severity of 
risks in the environment are that the level of risk looking 
forward to 2024 has decreased in comparison to last year’s 
outlook for 2023. In addition, most groups view the risk 
environment for 2024 as lower than the outlook for 2022 
two years ago. Only CEOs and CAEs have consistent future 
impressions of 2024 risk expectations relative to 2023, 
while all other positions see the 2024 risk outlook as lower 
than 2023. Except for the CSO and CDO positions, all other 
executive groups still have significant concerns about 2024, 
with each group rating the magnitude and severity of 2024 
risks greater than 6.0 (i.e., the “Significant Impact” level), 
with CROs and CAEs rating the magnitude and severity of 
2024 risks greater than 6.5.
The overall impressions collectively 
across all executive positions with 
respect to the magnitude and severity 
of risks in the environment are that the 
level of risk looking forward to 2024 
has decreased in comparison to last 
year’s outlook for 2023.
63

FIGURE 9
Overall, what is your impression of the magnitude and severity of risks your 
organization will be facing with respect to achieving your performance goals 
over the next 12 months?
2024
2023
2022
Board Member
6.13
6.60
5.85
CEO
6.32
6.34
6.62
CFO
6.00
6.53
6.25
CHRO
6.02
8.10
N/A
CRO
6.61
6.85
6.22
4
5
6
7
8
CAE
7.14
7.14
6.03
CIO/CTO
6.09
6.26
6.38
CSO
5.67
6.33
5.98
CDO
5.88
6.92
5.98
OCS
6.15
6.69
6.48
4
5
6
7
8
64

There is variation in perspectives across different executive 
positions, which suggests there may be significant value 
in explicitly discussing overall impressions about the risk 
environment among key leaders, especially at the highest 
level of the organization. Enterprise risk assessments should 
benefit from the influx of multiple, diverse perspectives.
Consistent with prior reports, we use the color-coding 
scheme below to highlight risks visually using three 
categories. In Table 10, we provide a summary of the impact 
assessments for each of the 36 risks for 2024 by category of 
executive using this color-coding scheme:
Classification 
Risks with an 
average score of 
Significant Impact
6.0 or higher
●
Potential Impact
4.51 through 5.99
●
Less Significant Impact
4.5 or lower
●
“Boards clearly see talent and skills 
shortages as major concerns heading 
into 2024 and over the next decade. 
There also are indications that 
directors may perceive certain risks, 
such as succession and retention 
challenges as well as the skills required 
for adopting new technologies, as 
more significant than most C-suite 
leaders in their organizations. Clear 
and frequent communications 
between the board and executive team 
are critical to ensuring alignment of 
the organization’s strategic priorities.”
EVELYN DILSAVER
INDEPENDENT DIRECTOR, 
PROTIVITI ADVISORY BOARD MEMBER
65

TABLE 10
Role
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/
retain talent and compete 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in 
governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Change in current interest rate environment
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
66

Strategic Risk Issues
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and 
emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology innovations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in 
competitive environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage 
an unexpected crisis 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability 
policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure requirements as 
well as expectations of key stakeholders 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and 
other activities 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our 
business 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social 
issues that are polarizing 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
67

Operational Risk Issues
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Third-party risks 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts 
in labor expectations, and address succession challenges
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Cyber threats 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity 
protection expectations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet 
performance expectations as well as “born digital” competitors 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market 
intelligence and increase productivity and efficiency 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety 
of employees (including their well-being and mental health), 
customers, suppliers and our communities
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work 
environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting 
business model and core operations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
68

Operational Risk Issues (continued)
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work 
remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely 
identification and escalation of emerging risk issues 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather 
phenomena 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2024 risk issues
In relation to our prior year results, almost every group 
of executives reduced the number of risks they rated as 
“Significant Impact.” Board members decreased their 
“Significant Impact” risks from four in 2023 to zero in 2024. 
Other groups also report declines in “Significant Impact” risks 
after the heightened concern over the two previous years. 
CEOs report zero risks at the highest impact level, down from 
five in 2023 and 11 in 2022. Somewhat surprisingly, CFOs 
report nine of the 36 risks as “Less Significant Impact,” more 
than any other executive group. These results help explain the 
slight decrease in the overall magnitude and severity results 
for 2024 relative to the prior year. 
While there is some consistency, there are also noticeable 
differences in views about 2024 risk conditions across 
executive type. Most positions (eight of 10) identify 
concerns related to attracting and developing talent and to 
the economy as top five risks. Interestingly, CHROs did not 
include concerns related to attracting talent as a top five 
risk concern. CSOs and CDOs are the only two positions to 
not identify the economy as a top five risk issue.
There is general agreement in the relative significance 
among specific risks between CEOs and board members, 
given that all of the 36 risks are rated at the “Potential 
Impact” level (4.51 through 5.99) by both groups, except 
for one risk that CEOs rate at the “Less Significant Impact” 
level (4.50 or lower). There is general agreement among 
boards and CEOs in the top five risks, given that four of the 
top five risks are the same for both positions. 
CFOs have somewhat differing views about the top risks 
compared to boards and CEOs, given that CFOs, unlike 
these other two groups, highlight concerns related to labor 
costs and the changing current interest rate environment 
as top five risk issues. CFOs are the most optimistic about 
2024 — they rate nine of the 36 risks at the “Less Significant 
Impact” level. Unlike board members and CFOs, CEOs 
identify risks related to heightened regulatory changes and 
scrutiny among their top five risk issues for 2024.
69

For 2024, only CHROs, CROs and CAEs view any of the risks 
at the “Significant Impact” level. Interestingly, however, there 
is variation across those three groups as to the nature of 
the risks at that level, suggesting they see differences in the 
relative significance of specific risks. The one exception is 
third-party risks, which CROs, CAEs and CHROs all rate at 
the “Significant Impact” level.
As noted earlier, varying perspectives among executives 
and directors call for more discussion among executive 
members in order to better understand how each group 
views the risk landscape and obtain a clearer view of the 
organization’s risk profile.
2034 risk issues
For a decade out (2034), overall risk perceptions exhibit 
significant variation relative to 2024. Board members rate 
three of their top five risk issues at the “Significant Impact” 
level, while CEOs, CFOs and CROs rate none of their top 
five risks at that level. CAEs have the most concern about 
the future, rating 15 risks at the “Significant Impact” level, 
including eight of the 14 operational risks. Further, CAEs 
rate all top five risks at 7.0 or higher. This is significantly 
more than any other executive group. On the other hand, 
only CFOs rate more than one risk as having a “Less 
Significant Impact” in 2034. Overall, the 2034 results show 
an increase in risk concerns for 2034 relative to the short-
term risk concerns summarized above. 
There is general agreement in the long-term top five 
risks for boards and CEOs, with technology-themed risks 
comprising three of their top five issues. Additionally, 
all positions — except CFOs — include cyber threats as 
a top five risk, with six of 10 positions rating that risk in 
the number one or two position for long-term risk issues. 
Eight of the 10 positions also include concerns about the 
adoption of digital technologies requiring skills in short 
supply as a top five risk issue a decade from now. Six of 
10 positions include concerns about the rapid speed of 
disruptive innovation as a long-term top five risk issue. 
Technology- and innovation-related risks are a common 
theme for long-term horizons.
Table 11 shows a summary of the impact assessments for 
each of the 36 risks for both 2024 and 2034 to highlight 
differences in views about individual risks across different 
executive positions.
Varying perspectives among 
executives and directors call 
for more discussion among 
executive members in order to 
better understand how each 
group views the risk landscape 
and obtain a clearer view of the 
organization’s risk profile.
70

TABLE 11
Perceived impact for 2024 and 2034 — by role
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/
retain talent and compete
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in 
governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
71

Macroeconomic Risk Issues (continued)
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Change in current interest rate environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Strategic Risk Issues
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and 
emerging technologies and/or other market forces
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology 
innovations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in 
competitive environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
72

Strategic Risk Issues (continued)
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage 
an unexpected crisis 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability 
policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure requirements as 
well as expectations of key stakeholders 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and 
other activities 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our 
business 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social 
issues that are polarizing
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
73

Operational Risk Issues
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Third-party risks 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts 
in labor expectations, and address succession challenges
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Cyber threats
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity 
protection expectations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet 
performance expectations as well as “born digital” competitors
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market 
intelligence and increase productivity and efficiency
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety 
of employees (including their well-being and mental health), 
customers, suppliers and our communities
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
74

Operational Risk Issues (continued)
Year
Board
CEO
CFO
CHRO
CRO
CAE
CIO/
CTO
CSO
CDO
Other 
C-Suite
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work 
environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting 
business model and core operations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work 
remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely 
identification and escalation of emerging risk issues
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather 
phenomena
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
75

Figures 10-19 on the following pages highlight the top 
five risks identified by board members and each executive 
position (collectively referred to as “leadership positions”). 
For 2024, eight of the 10 leadership positions (except 
for CHROs and CDOs) rank concerns about succession 
challenges and the ability to attract and retain top talent 
along with uncertainty regarding current economic 
conditions in their top five risks for 2024. Succession 
challenges and retaining top talent is rated the top risk by 
board members and CFOs, while CEOs, CHROs and OCS 
position groups list concerns about economic conditions 
as their top risk. Unease about the organization’s ability 
to manage cyber threats, such as ransomware and other 
attacks, is also recognized by six of the position groups. 
For 2024, CHROs, CROs and CAEs rate each of their top 
five risks at the “Significant Impact” level; however, no other 
leadership position group rates any of the top five risks at 
this level. While most position groups share a number of top 
five risks, one position group has a unique set of risks. CDOs 
are focused on a distinctive set of risks for 2024, citing 
social media developments, data analytics, social issues and 
DEI, geopolitical shifts, and the rising threat of catastrophic 
natural disasters. CSOs also list three other unique risks 
(all strategic) in their top five rankings. Overall, the results 
reflect how different roles offer varying perspectives when 
assessing risks in disparate environments and over longer 
versus shorter time horizons. 
Nineteen of the 36 risks that appear as top five risk 
concerns for 2024 are cited by at least one of the position 
groups. Within this collective group of top five risk 
concerns, there are six of the 10 macroeconomic risks, 
eight of the 14 operational risks and five of the 12 strategic 
risks. Of the three risks cited by at least half of the position 
groups, two are operational risks and the other is a 
macroeconomic risk.
Looking out to 2034, four risks are common top five risks 
across the majority of position groups: (1) worries that 
the organization may not be sufficiently prepared to meet 
cyber threats, (2) concerns about succession challenges and 
the ability to attract and retain top talent, (3) concerns that 
the adoption of digital strategies will require new skills that 
are in short supply, and (4) concerns about the rapid speed 
of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging 
technologies and/or other market forces. For 2034, 15 of 
the 36 risks that appear as top five risks are cited by at least 
one of the position groups, with four being macroeconomic, 
five strategic and six operational.
These results prominently reflect the importance of 
bringing varying perspectives to the enterprise risk 
management (ERM) process. Each executive is needed to 
best identify and assess risks in disparate environments and 
over longer versus shorter time horizons. It is of paramount 
importance that both the board and management team 
engage in dialogue regarding the most critical enterprise 
risks, given the different perspectives each brings to the 
table and the potential for a lack of consensus. Without 
clarity of focus, the executive team may not be aligned both 
internally and with the board on what the top risks are. 
Worse, they may not be appropriately addressing the most 
important risks facing the organization, thereby leaving the 
organization potentially vulnerable to certain risk events.
76

FIGURE 10A
Board Members — 2024
FIGURE 10B
Board Members — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges 
5.79
6.01
5.32
O
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
5.70
5.93
5.39
M
Cyber threats 
5.64
5.76
5.35
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.51
5.81
5.36
M
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as 
well as “born digital” competitors 
5.51
5.66
4.96
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.35
6.01
5.36
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.17
6.01
5.68
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
6.02
5.92
5.91
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.94
6.12
5.87
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.94
5.66
5.56
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
77

FIGURE 11A
CEOs — 2024
FIGURE 11B
CEOs — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.72
5.78
6.19
M
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
5.53
5.68
6.15
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.53
5.34
5.85
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.39
6.17
6.00
O
Cyber threats 
5.35
5.38
5.68
O
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.97
6.04
6.17
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.91
5.76
6.39
M
Cyber threats 
5.88
5.48
5.62
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.84
5.99
6.21
S
Change in current interest rate environment
5.82
5.47
5.63
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
78

FIGURE 12A
CFOs — 2024
FIGURE 12B
CFOs — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.48
5.76
5.44
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.45
5.58
5.64
M
Increases in labor costs 
5.29
5.59
5.69
M
Cyber threats 
5.10
5.29
5.28
O
Change in current interest rate environment
5.07
5.31
5.03
M
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.75
5.70
5.01
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.60
5.52
5.03
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.56
5.67
4.74
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.54
5.70
5.08
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.52
5.29
4.68
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
79

FIGURE 13A
CROs — 2024
FIGURE 13B
CROs — 2034
Cyber threats 
6.37
5.44
5.64
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.34
6.25
6.02
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.19
6.20
5.40
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.15
5.51
5.66
S
Third-party risks 
6.03
5.71
5.55
O
4
5
6
7
8
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.66
6.54
6.46
S
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other 
changes in competitive environment 
5.59
5.42
5.39
S
Cyber threats 
5.57
6.02
5.89
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.54
6.48
6.17
S
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
5.51
6.36
6.46
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
80

FIGURE 14A
CAEs — 2024
FIGURE 14B
CAEs — 2034
Cyber threats 
7.03
6.03
5.94
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.67
6.61
5.35
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
6.51
6.30
6.04
O
Third-party risks 
6.44
5.69
5.30
O
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as 
well as “born digital” competitors 
6.20
5.63
5.29
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
7.59
6.36
6.30
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
7.05
6.50
6.59
O
Third-party risks 
7.03
6.19
5.81
O
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
7.01
6.44
6.50
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.99
6.12
5.93
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
81

FIGURE 15A
CIOs/CTOs — 2024
FIGURE 15B
CIOs/CTOs — 2034
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
5.75
5.88
6.18
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.75
6.17
6.26
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with 
growing identity protection expectations
5.71
5.83
5.83
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.66
5.60
5.89
M
Change in current interest rate environment
5.60
5.63
5.64
M
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
5.94
5.48
4.70
O
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
5.92
5.86
5.58
M
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.82
5.46
5.40
M
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.76
5.71
5.33
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.71
5.91
5.62
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
82

FIGURE 16A
CSOs — 2024
FIGURE 16B
CSOs — 2034
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.75
5.89
5.10
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.49
5.53
5.20
M
Substitute products and services that affect 
the viability of our business 
5.39
5.37
4.95
S
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
5.39
5.75
5.31
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, 
manage shifts in labor expectations, and address 
succession challenges
5.39
5.88
5.63
O
4
5
6
7
8
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.75
5.80
4.75
S
Cyber threats 
5.75
5.35
4.39
O
Social media developments and platform 
technology innovations 
5.61
5.53
4.07
S
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other 
changes in competitive environment 
5.55
5.80
4.93
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.41
5.82
4.76
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
83

FIGURE 17A
CDOs — 2024
FIGURE 17B
CDOs — 2034
Social media developments and platform 
technology innovations 
5.50
5.18
4.47
S
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics 
to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency 
5.46
5.43
5.75
O
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on 
ability to attract/retain talent and compete 
5.44
5.58
5.86
M
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and 
instability in governmental regimes or 
expansion of global terrorism
5.38
5.44
4.79
M
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters 
and weather phenomena 
5.31
5.68
N/A
O
4
5
6
7
8
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.31
5.67
5.54
M
Resistance to change restricting 
organization from adjusting business model 
and core operations 
5.15
5.81
5.39
O
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other 
changes in competitive environment 
5.10
5.53
4.84
S
Cyber threats 
5.10
5.43
4.27
O
Organization’s culture not sufficiently 
encouraging timely identification and 
escalation of emerging risk issues 
5.10
5.49
4.59
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
84

FIGURE 18A
CHROs — 2024
FIGURE 18B
CHROs — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.24
7.12
N/A
M
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as 
well as “born digital” competitors 
6.17
6.95
N/A
O
Meeting expectations around protecting 
health and safety of employees (including 
their well-being and mental health), 
customers, suppliers and our communities
6.17
6.90
N/A
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
6.12
6.84
N/A
O
Third-party risks 
6.10
6.89
N/A
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.00
6.77
N/A
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
6.00
7.00
N/A
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
5.62
7.10
N/A
O
Resistance to change restricting organization 
from adjusting business model and core 
operations 
5.62
6.89
N/A
O
Growing focus on climate change and other 
sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as 
expectations of key stakeholders 
5.60
7.01
N/A
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
85

FIGURE 19A
Other C-Suite — 2024
FIGURE 19B
Other C-Suite — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.94
6.33
5.65
M
Cyber threats 
5.81
5.11
5.37
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
5.68
5.89
5.83
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.61
5.94
5.25
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.53
5.53
5.45
S
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.09
5.72
5.48
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.93
6.56
6.50
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.86
6.25
5.58
M
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.79
7.46
6.55
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.78
6.33
6.50
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
86

Analysis across industry groups
What you need to know
What they see: Most industry groups perceive the magnitude 
and severity of risks their organizations face will be lower as 
they look ahead to 2024 relative to 2023.
	• However, all industry groups still see the overall riskiness 
of the business environment as higher (or as high) as 2022.
Differing perceptions by industry: Among the notable 
industry risk concerns for 2024:
	• The Healthcare industry group rates the most risks at the 
“Significant Impact” level — these include cyber threats, 
data privacy, third-party risks and talent shortages.
	• Financial services respondents rate four of the 36 risks 
at the “Significant Impact” level — overall economic 
conditions, the current interest rate environment, 
heightened regulatory scrutiny and cyber threats. 
	• Energy and Utilities organizations believe that 2024 will 
be riskier than 2023.
	• Three of the seven industry groups rate cyber threats as a 
“Significant Impact” risk.
The next decade is riskier: The significance of risk concerns a 
decade out is higher than short-term risk concerns. 
	• For five of the seven industry groups, all of the top five 
risks for 2034 are at the “Significant Impact” level.
	• Cyber threats and attracting, developing and retaining 
top talent, including succession challenges, are in the top 
five risks for all industry groups.
	• Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and 
weather phenomena is a top five long-term risk concern 
for Energy and Utilities and Government Agencies. 
Important takeaway: These noted differences in perceptions 
of risk issues across the different industry groups highlight the 
importance of understanding industry drivers and emerging 
developments to identify the most significant enterprise risks 
and emerging risk concerns in each group.
We analyze responses across seven industry groups to 
determine whether industries rank-order risks differently. 
Similar to our analysis of the full sample and across 
different types of respondents, we analyze responses about 
overall impressions of the magnitude and severity of risks 
across industry groups.
Industry group
Number of 
respondents
Financial Services (FS)
241
Consumer Products and Services (CPS)
218
Manufacturing and Distribution (MD)
217
Technology, Media and 
Telecommunications (TMT)
120
Healthcare (HC)
104
Energy and Utilities (EU)
112
Governmental Agencies (GOVT)
43
Other industries (not separately reported)
88
Total number of respondents
1,143
87

FIGURE 20
Overall, what is your impression of the magnitude and severity of risks your organization will be facing 
with respect to achieving your performance goals over the next 12 months?
Financial Services
6.38
6.63
6.31
Consumer Products and Services
6.39
7.11
6.33
Manufacturing and Distribution
6.30
6.15
6.37
Technology, Media and Telecommunications
6.36
6.49
6.03
4
5
6
7
8
Healthcare
6.49
6.91
6.27
Energy and Utilities
6.38
6.08
5.88
Government
5.74
6.25
5.73
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
The scores below in Figure 20 reflect responses using a 10-point scale where 1 = “Extremely Low” and 10 = “Extremely High.”
88

With the exception of the Energy and Utilities and 
Manufacturing and Distribution industry groups, 
respondents in all other industry groups perceive the 
magnitude and severity of risks their organizations face 
will be lower as they look ahead to 2024 relative to 2023; 
however, most industry groups still see the overall riskiness 
of the business environment as higher (or as high) as 2022. 
In addition, industry groups are consistent in their belief 
that risks in 2024 will have a “Significant Impact,” with the 
only exception being Government, which had an overall 
magnitude and severity score below 6.0. This suggests there 
is an overall concern for the short-term future, something 
that should be noted when considering additional data.
Consistent with prior reports, we use the color-coding 
scheme in the accompanying table to highlight risks visually 
using three categories. In Table 12, we provide a summary 
of the impact assessments for each of the 36 risks for 2024 
by industry group using this color-coding scheme:
Table 12 shows the average risk scores for 2024 to highlight 
differences in views about individual risks across different 
industry groups. In Table 13, we show 2034 results.
Classification 
Risks with an 
average score of 
Significant Impact
6.0 or higher
●
Potential Impact
4.51 through 5.99
●
Less Significant Impact
4.5 or lower
●
89

TABLE 12
Industry
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Change in current interest rate environment
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and compete 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
90

Strategic Risk Issues
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies and/or other market forces 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected crisis 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social issues that are polarizing 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology innovations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure requirements as well 
as expectations of key stakeholders 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
91

Operational Risk Issues
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Cyber threats 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and address succession challenges
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Third-party risks 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase productivity and efficiency 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting business model and core operations 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely identification and escalation of emerging risk issues 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety of employees (including their well-being and mental health), 
customers, suppliers and our communities
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry 
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
92

2024 risk concerns
Figure 20 reveals that respondents from five of the seven 
industry groups perceive that the magnitude and severity of 
risks in the overall environment affecting their organization 
will decrease in 2024 from the 2023 levels, with six industry 
groups indicating that they will be above 2022 levels. When 
comparing the number of risks appearing in both the 2024 
and 2023 surveys that are rated at the “Significant Impact” 
level, there is a noticeable decrease in the collective 
number of risks at that level across all industries for 2024 
compared to 2023. For 2024, three macroeconomic risks 
are rated by one or more industries at the “Significant 
Impact” level, compared to six macroeconomic risks at 
that level for 2023. For strategic risks, the decrease in 
the number of risks rated at the “Significant Impact” level 
dropped from five in 2023 to one in 2024. The decrease in 
number of “Significant Impact” risks for operational risks is 
from 10 in 2023 to four 2024 risks.
Respondents in the Healthcare industry group rate the 
most risks at the “Significant Impact” level, with seven 
for 2024. Four of their seven highest-rated risks are 
operational in nature, with concerns related to cyber 
threats, data privacy, third-party risks and talent shortages 
(most likely clinical healthcare workers, particularly 
nurses). Financial services respondents rate four of the 36 
risks at the “Significant Impact” level, with two of those four 
relating to overall economic conditions and the current 
interest rate environment (both macroeconomic issues), 
one related to heightened regulatory scrutiny, and one 
related to cyber threats. Only two other industry groups 
rate at least one risk at the “Significant Impact” level. The 
Consumer Products and Services industry group rates the 
macroeconomic risk related to economic conditions and 
inflationary pressures at the “Significant Impact” level and 
the Technology, Media and Telecommunications industry 
group rates cyber threats at that level of significance.
Three of the seven industry groups rate cyber threats as a 
“Significant Impact” risk: Financial Services; Technology, Media 
and Telecommunications; and Healthcare. The Financial 
Services, Consumer Products and Services, and Healthcare 
industry groups are all concerned about economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures. Financial Services and 
Healthcare are the two industry groups also most concerned 
about heightened regulatory scrutiny.
With the continuing transitions happening in energy 
generation, it is not surprising that Energy and Utilities 
respondents believe that 2024 will be riskier than 2023, even 
though none of the 36 risks they rate is at the “Significant 
Impact” level. In addition, Energy and Utilities respondents 
rate 10 of the 36 risks as “Less Significant Impact” (4.50 or 
lower), more than any other industry group.
All industry groups rate cyber threats as a top five risk 
concern, suggesting no industry is immune to those 
exposures. All industry groups, except Energy and Utilities 
and Government, include concerns about economic 
conditions, including inflationary pressures, as a top five 
risk concern. And all industry groups, except Financial 
Services, highlight concerns about the ability to attract, 
develop and retain talent as a top five risk concern for 
2024. Increases in labor costs are of particular concern 
for Healthcare, Consumer Products and Services, and 
Government for 2024.
2034 risk issues
The significance of risk concerns a decade out is noticeably 
higher than short-term risk concerns. For five of the seven 
industry groups, all of the top five risks for 2034 are at 
the “Significant Impact” level. This is in contrast to 2024, 
where only one industry group (Healthcare) rated all top 
five risks at that level. The Healthcare industry group rates 
one of its risks at noticeably high levels (exceeding 7.0) for 
2034. It also rates the long-term outlook as higher than 
how it viewed the 10-year outlook last year, suggesting its 
long-term risk perceptions have elevated from last year. 
Government entities also view long-term risks as more 
significant than their view of those risks last year, with four 
of their top five risks rated higher for 2034 than 2033.
93

TABLE 13
Perceived impact for 2024 and 2034 — by industry group
Macroeconomic Risk Issues
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Increases in labor costs
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Change in current interest rate environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in short supply
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Access to capital/liquidity
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Impact of social issues and DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and compete
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability in governmental regimes or expansion of global terrorism
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
94

Macroeconomic Risk Issues (continued)
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Volatility in global financial markets and currency exchange rates
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Changes in global markets and trade policies
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Pandemic-related government policies and regulation
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Strategic Risk Issues
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by new and emerging technologies and/or other market forces
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Organization not sufficiently resilient and/or agile to manage an unexpected crisis
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Limited opportunities for organic growth
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
95

Strategic Risk Issues (continued)
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Formulating business response to legal, political and social issues that are polarizing
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Social media developments and platform technology innovations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Growing focus on climate change and other sustainability policies, regulations, and expanding disclosure 
requirements as well as expectations of key stakeholders
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other changes in competitive environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint ventures and other activities
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Substitute products and services that affect the viability of our business
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Performance shortfalls that trigger activist shareholders
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
96

Operational Risk Issues
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Cyber threats
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and address 
succession challenges
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Third-party risks
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity protection expectations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Challenges in sustaining culture due to changes in overall work environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to meet performance expectations as well as 
“born digital” competitors
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and increase productivity 
and efficiency
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Resistance to change restricting organization from adjusting business model and core operations
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
97

Operational Risk Issues (continued)
Year
FS
CPS
MD
TMT
HC
EU
GOVT
Organization’s culture not sufficiently encouraging timely identification and escalation of emerging 
risk issues 
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Meeting expectations around protecting health and safety of employees (including their well-being and 
mental health), customers, suppliers and our communities
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Managing demands on or expectations of workforce to work remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and weather phenomena
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Enhanced exposure to fraud in the industry
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
Uncertainty surrounding core supply chain ecosystem
2024
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
2034
●
●
●
●
●
●
●
98

Figures 21-27 on the following pages summarize the top-
rated risks by industry group separately for 2024 and 2034. 
Only the top five risks are reported and, where available, 
scores for 2023 and 2022 (for comparisons to 2024) and 
2033 and 2032 (for comparisons to 2034) are also provided.
Cyber threats are in the top five long-term risks for all 
industry groups. And concerns about attracting, developing 
and retaining top talent, including succession challenges, 
are in the top five risks for all industry groups. Four of 
seven industry groups are concerned about heightened 
regulatory changes and scrutiny. That is the number one 
long-term concern for Energy and Utilities organizations.
The rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and 
weather phenomena is a top five long-term risk concern 
for Energy and Utilities and Government Agencies. The 
Energy and Utilities industry group is the only group to rate 
concerns surrounding a growing focus on climate change 
and other sustainability policies as a top five risk.
These noted differences in perceptions of risk issues 
across the different industry groups highlight the 
importance of understanding industry drivers and emerging 
developments in order to identify the most significant 
enterprise risks and emerging risk concerns in each group.
Following each set of bar charts by industry group, we provide 
additional commentary about industry-specific risk drivers.
Noted differences in perceptions 
of risk issues across the different 
industry groups highlight the 
importance of understanding 
industry drivers and emerging 
developments in order to 
identify the most significant 
enterprise risks and emerging 
risk concerns in each group.
99

FIGURE 21A
Financial Services — 2024
FIGURE 21B
Financial Services — 2034
Change in current interest rate environment
6.36
5.94
6.17
M
Economic conditions,
including inflationary pressures 
6.32
5.74
6.02
M
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.04
5.58
5.80
S
Cyber threats 
6.02
5.48
5.69
O
Third-party risks 
5.92
5.25
5.70
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Cyber threats 
6.51
5.76
5.61
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.38
6.16
6.38
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.36
6.03
6.19
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.35
5.96
6.09
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.21
6.05
6.04
O
4
5
6
7
8
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
100

Commentary — Financial Services 
Industry Group
BY MICHAEL BRAUNEIS
GLOBAL LEADER, FINANCIAL SERVICES INDUSTRY PRACTICE, 
PROTIVITI
Protiviti and NC State University’s ERM Initiative have 
been conducting our Top Risks Survey for the past 12 
years. This journey began just as financial markets around 
the world were starting their long, slow recovery from 
the global financial crisis, and has since covered the worst 
global pandemic in 100 years as well as near record-low 
interest rates followed shortly by the fastest rate hiking 
cycle in history. 
In this context, getting the first look at each year’s survey 
results and comparing them to the prior year’s is always 
interesting — but the most compelling years to analyze are 
those in which the market breaks from recent trends and 
gives us some new risks to talk about. It’s safe to say that 
2024 is one of those years.
Our observations
Executives have arrived at a pessimistic consensus. Our 
2023 survey results reflected a deep sense of uncertainty 
and ambiguity, with many executives concerned that a 
recession was imminent even as they struggled to attract 
and retain staff in a red-hot job market. We commented in 
our 2023 report that we were surprised that the risk tied 
to economic conditions and inflation dropped from second 
place in 2022 to third in 2023, as we saw financial markets 
facing increasing headwinds. Fast-forwarding to the results 
for 2024, the liquidity crisis and resulting bank failures in 
early 2023, a tougher regulatory environment and push 
to raise capital, higher funding costs, and expectations 
of having to manage the business in a “higher for longer” 
interest rate environment have collectively convinced 
financial services leaders that the industry is indeed in a 
tougher economic cycle. Interestingly though, concerns 
about access to capital and liquidity only ranked 16th on 
the list of top risks, up slightly from 20th place last year. 
This suggests our respondents are more concerned about 
the impact that current market conditions are having on 
their profitability and growth prospects than as a threat to 
their survival. 
Partially as a result, the war for talent is abating. In last 
year’s survey summary, we predicted that concerns about 
talent would diminish by the time of our 2024 survey and 
that turned out to be an accurate forecast. Considering the 
economic challenges above, financial institutions have cut 
spending significantly and many have put hiring freezes 
in place. While there is still significant competition for 
talent in pockets — notably in data, AI/machine learning, 
and regulatory compliance — overall, voluntary attrition 
rates in the United States have come down significantly 
according to data from the Bureau of Labor Statistics,6 and 
compensation expectations are normalizing. As a result, 
concerns about attracting and retaining talent saw a big drop 
in this year’s survey results, from second to sixth place.
The liquidity crisis and resulting bank 
failures in early 2023, a tougher 
regulatory environment and push to 
raise capital, higher funding costs, and 
expectations of having to manage the 
business in a “higher for longer” interest 
rate environment have collectively 
convinced financial services leaders 
that the industry is indeed in a tougher 
economic cycle.
6	 “Job Openings and Labor Turnover — September 2023,” News release from the Bureau of Labor Statistics, November 1, 2023: www.bls.gov/news.release/pdf/jolts.pdf.
101

In general, financial services leaders feel we are in a riskier 
time. In addition to the risk ranking order, it’s also instructive 
to look at the average scores assigned to the top risks and 
how those have changed year over year. We look at this as our 
survey’s version of a VIX score or “fear gauge.” In 2023, the top 
risk (change in interest rate environment) received an average 
5.94 score on our 10-point scale. In 2024, interest rates 
remained the top risk but the score for that factor increased to 
6.36. The average score of the top five risks as a group in 2024 
rose to 6.13 from 5.76 in 2023. Maybe most notably, the top 
four risks in 2024 all earned a higher score than the top risk in 
2023 did. In other words, although several of the top concerns 
from last year remain near the top of the list this year, the level 
of concern has gone up across the board.
Unsurprisingly, cyber risks took a big jump — and are likely 
to grow further. Last year, we were surprised that cyber 
threats only ranked as the 11th highest risk, particularly 
as this was the top risk for 2022. For 2024, this trend has 
reversed and cyber risk has moved back into the top five. 
Notably, our 2024 results were collected before the high 
profile ICBC ransomware incident occurred in November, 
which is causing financial institutions around the world to 
reevaluate both their own cyber risk management controls 
as well as how they would address threats that impact their 
critical counterparties. As a result, we wouldn’t be surprised 
to see this risk move even higher on the list for 2025.
An increasingly complex third-party risk landscape drove 
that item up the list. Third-party risk took the largest leap 
of all items on our list in 2024, rising 11 spots to fifth. We 
believe there are multiple factors behind this, including:
	• Growing concerns about counterparty credit risk and 
financial stability driven by the economic conditions 
described above;
	• An ever-larger list of security breaches caused by third-
party vendors and/or technology platforms they provide;
	• Growing reliance on cloud and software-as-a-service 
providers across the financial services industry; and
	• Increasing regulatory scrutiny related to third-party 
partnerships, particularly at the intersection of banking 
and fintech where banking regulators have criticized 
insured depository institutions serving as a conduit for 
less regulated fintechs without appropriate review and 
oversight of their activities by the bank.
While concerns about the economy and the regulatory 
response dominate the top of the list, technological 
innovation and related infrastructure needs follow closely 
behind. “Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as well as ‘born 
digital’ competitors,” “adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply,” and “inability to utilize 
rigorous data analytics to achieve market intelligence and 
increase productivity and efficiency” all appear among 
the top 10 risks for the third year in a row. This presents a 
critical strategic challenge as financial institutions attempt 
to cut expenses aggressively even as the cost of technology 
modernization efforts continues to rise — and executives 
recognize that the only thing worse than incurring these 
costs is not making the investment and falling further 
behind more innovative competitors. This dynamic will put 
significant pressure to cut costs even further in other areas 
as technology consumes an ever-greater share of operating 
expenses in the financial services industry.
Looking ahead to 2034
For the past few annual surveys, we’ve also asked 
respondents about the top risks they expect to face 10 
years in the future. For our respondents, the 2034 view 
generally mirrors the decade-out results we received last 
year, with a few exceptions that seem to be colored by a 
focus on 2024’s top risks.
Consistent with our prior year results, concerns about 
keeping up with the threat of digital disruption continue 
to dominate the longer-term view. Cyber threats jumped 
and worries about attracting talent dipped a bit, which is 
consistent with the trend described above regarding 2023 
vs. 2024 results.
102

Other noteworthy results in the 2034 review:
	• Regulatory scrutiny remains high on the list both in the 
current and 10 years’ out view, and this has been the 
case for as long as we have conducted this survey. This is 
interesting given the exciting innovations coming online 
for compliance functions, particularly involving data 
analytics and generative AI. We think these will become 
truly groundbreaking advancements that will finally 
allow financial institutions to get ahead of regulatory 
expectations in key areas like financial crimes while 
bending the cost curve down over time. Is the market 
more pessimistic than we are about the opportunities 
that exist in this area, or does it simply believe that 
lawmakers and regulatory agencies will continue to 
move the bar just out of reach? 
	• “Change in current interest rate environment” jumped 
from 14th on last year’s 10-year outlook list to seventh 
in 2034. Is this just recency bias given the impact 
the rate environment has had in 2022 and 2023, or 
do our respondents think that rate trends will move 
higher in the foreseeable future? What we also found 
interesting is that historically, moderately higher rates 
are good for financial institutions’ margins — with 
most of the current stress being caused by short-term 
funding costs increasing while the value of long-dated 
assets has fallen. This is a temporary problem that will 
diminish as longer-term assets that were priced during 
times of record-low rates run off. Perhaps concerns 
that higher-for-longer interest rates will constrain 
funding demands and deal flow are outweighing the 
margin upside that this scenario would represent for 
our respondents.
	• Finally, there are a few 2034 risks that fell closer to the 
bottom of the list than we would have expected:
	– “Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and instability 
in governmental regimes or expansion of global 
terrorism” moved up five spots from last year but 
is still only in 25th place, and “changes in global 
markets and trade policies” held steady at 33rd 
place, making it the fourth lowest-rated risk. These 
results are surprising in light of growing geopolitical 
conflicts from the Russian/Ukraine war, regional 
tensions in the Pacific, and renewed fighting 
between Israeli and Palestinians and heightened risk 
of broader conflicts in the Middle East as a result. 
Of note, we did see a notable increase in risk ratings 
provided by respondents who completed our survey 
after the October 7, 2023, events in the Middle East.
	– “Formulating business response to legal, political 
and social issues that are polarizing” was a new 
addition to our survey this year but only came in at 
29th place. Likewise, “impact of social issues and 
DEI priorities on ability to attract/retain talent and 
compete” actually dropped from 24th to 30th place 
this year. Given that both issues have continued 
to consume a greater share of business leaders’ 
attention as well as media scrutiny regarding their 
companies over the past year, it’s interesting that 
our respondents think they will be so much less 
significant as concerns a decade out. 
	– Lastly, “managing demands on or expectations of 
workforce to work remotely or as part of a hybrid 
work environment” dropped nine spots from 22nd 
to 31st place. While we’ve certainly seen progress 
over the past 12 months in financial institutions 
bringing a larger share of their workforces back into 
the office, overall attendance rates vary significantly 
by geography and many financial institutions have 
told us that they are still not consistently where they 
would like to be in this regard. Our survey results 
suggest the market believes these challenges will 
be fully resolved, though, and that a significant 
percentage of remote or hybrid work is not part of 
the long-term future of financial services.
Regulatory scrutiny remains high on the 
list both in the current and 10 years’ out 
view, and this has been the case for as 
long as we have conducted this survey. 
This is interesting given the exciting 
innovations coming online for compliance 
functions, particularly involving data 
analytics and generative AI.
103

FIGURE 22A
Consumer Products and Services — 2024
FIGURE 22B
Consumer Products and Services — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Economic conditions, including
inflationary pressures 
6.07
6.15
5.89
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.83
6.22
5.72
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
5.71
5.98
5.87
M
Increases in labor costs 
5.67
6.24
5.86
M
Cyber threats 
5.62
5.76
5.24
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.16
5.78
5.06
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.13
6.20
5.93
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.12
6.22
5.61
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.10
6.37
5.79
O
Increases in labor costs 
6.00
6.04
5.67
M
4
5
6
7
8
104

Commentary — Consumer Products 
and Services Industry Group
BY CAROL RAIMO
GLOBAL LEADER, CONSUMER PRODUCTS AND SERVICES 
INDUSTRY PRACTICE, PROTIVITI
The Consumer Products and Services industry group faces 
a long list of headwinds heading into 2024. Inflationary 
pressure, workforce attrition with talent gaps and 
protecting customers’ data are top on the list of major 
concerns weighing on the minds of senior executives in the 
consumer packaged goods (CPG) and retail industry group. 
Separately, for hospitality and airlines companies, cyber 
threats, the rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters, 
and geopolitical shifts and regional conflicts are cited 
among these industries’ top risks.
In Protiviti’s latest Top Risks Survey, CPG and retail 
executives were asked to provide their perspectives 
on the biggest risks facing their organizations over the 
next 12 months and a decade ahead. Their views reflect 
a growing sense of uncertainty in today’s business 
environment, where market competition remains 
fierce, the costs of goods and labor continue to rise, and 
companies are desperate for new technologies to better 
manage risks and improve customer experience.
Even as supply challenges have normalized, the difficult 
macroeconomic environment has made it challenging for 
CPG and retail companies to forecast future demand and 
make growth plans. Industry leaders are exploring ways to 
retain and grow their customer base with customer loyalty 
programs and new payment strategies for shoppers.
But how can you pass on the high cost related to inflation 
and supply chain disruptions to customers without hurting 
customer satisfaction and loyalty? How do you retain your 
top talent and keep a lid on rising labor costs? These are 
tough questions that business leaders must tackle head on, 
and they can only do this effectively with access to data 
analytics and market intelligence, which consequently, is 
identified as the ninth-rated risk for 2024 by CPG and retail 
executives who responded to the survey.
Below we discuss other top risks identified by CPG and 
retail respondents.
The difficult macroeconomic 
environment has made it challenging for 
CPG and retail companies to forecast 
future demand and make growth plans.

Macroeconomic and labor market challenges
Few industries have been more impacted by inflation than 
the CPG industry so it is no surprise that executives cited 
economic challenges, including inflation, as their No. 1 risk 
for 2024, with workforce-related challenges coming in at 
second place. 
A change in the interest rate environment is another source 
of concern. Since 2022, the Federal Reserve’s campaign 
to fight inflation by increasing interest rates has hurt 
companies’ ability to borrow and grow. Although rate 
increases have slowed this year, business leaders fear the 
Fed might not reverse course next year if inflation remains 
high. CPG and retail respondents cited the interest rate 
issue as the No. 7 risk for 2024. 
On the labor front, the CPG and retail industry are 
experiencing a perfect storm as workers leave in search of 
a better work-life balance, greater incentives (salary and 
benefits), flexibility, and a working environment that better 
supports their mental health and overall well-being. The 
labor issues and economic fears are clearly interconnected. 
In the United States, the CPG industry provides 2.3 million 
jobs and the retail industry, the largest private-sector 
employer in the U.S., supports 52 million jobs. Although the 
labor market has remained resilient, job growth is expected 
to decelerate in the coming months in lockstep with slower 
105

economic activity and the prospect of restrictive credit 
conditions, according to the National Retail Federation.
To address the workforce challenges and transform their 
relationship with employees, retail business leaders must 
develop a deeper understanding of the labor dynamic 
and the forces driving changes across the industry. The 
conversation should begin in the boardrooms and executive 
suites, starting with these prompting questions: What do 
frontline employees and managers want in a job? What will 
motivate them to show up every day?
The customer should be front and center in the inflation 
discussion. In particular, as household debt, especially 
credit card debt, hits an all-time high, brands and retailers 
need to consider the impact of a stressed consumer and 
higher interest rates on consumer behavior. They also need 
to consider which parts of their customer base are more 
and less impacted by inflation, so they can adjust their 
marketing and advertising strategies accordingly.
Cost optimization through automation and technology 
modernization
The economic uncertainty and inflationary pressures are 
also forcing CPG and retail companies to explore different 
ways to cut costs. It’s a sink-or-swim situation for many, 
especially smaller companies that have limited purchasing 
power and ability to negotiate lower cost with suppliers. 
With margins compressing, companies are reassessing 
working capital and cash flow management, reducing 
inventory in warehouses and negotiating pricing with 
suppliers, among other cost optimization measures. 
Visibility and transparency into data are crucial for making 
informed cost-cutting decisions, and so companies also are 
investing time and resources into automation to improve 
operational efficiencies and data analytics to gain better 
visibility into all aspects of operations.
AI and other technology tools are 
becoming increasingly important as 
companies consider running their 
businesses with fewer people.
Legacy systems, however, are proving to be a challenge; 
automation is easier for current technologies, but 
more difficult for legacy ones. As a result, the retail 
and CPG executives who participated in the survey 
said they are particularly concerned about the inability 
of existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure to 
meet performance expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors. This concern was ranked fifth among the 2024 
top risk issues.
Additionally, the respondents said they are worried 
about the ability of their organizations to adopt digital 
technologies given the shortage in technical staff (ranked 
10th for 2024). Despite these concerns, some retail and 
CPG companies are being aggressive in adopting new 
technologies. A separate survey conducted by Protiviti 
recently found that more than half of financial executives 
in the retail and CPG industry are already deploying 
generative AI to predict consumer behaviors, suggest 
timely product recommendations, optimize pricing, 
mitigate fraud and manage inventory.
AI technologies are becoming increasingly important as 
companies seek to stay ahead of the competition, run 
their businesses with fewer people and enhance customer 
experience. The challenge for some companies will be finding 
the most efficient way to integrate these technologies into 
existing legacy systems without hurting productivity or 
introducing new risks, such as cyber attacks.
Cybersecurity and data privacy expectations
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing identity 
protection expectations has become a C-suite priority in 
today’s omnichannel environment. Previously, companies 
relied on third parties to collect and sell consumer data, 
but now they are keeping it in-house. This shift in data 
ownership requires them to prioritize data protection.
106

At the same time, as more retail and CPG companies 
transform digitally, the threat of cyber intrusion or 
operational failures that result in data exposures has risen 
dramatically. Recent industry-related cyber attacks have 
included digital disruptions to production lines and supply 
chains. The concerns about cybersecurity are evident from 
the recent SEC guidance on cybersecurity disclosures, 
which focus on protecting information and assessing its 
impact on organizations.
As cyberattacks continue to increase in severity, CPG 
and retail organizations need to prioritize protection and 
compliance. It also means paying attention to third-party 
risks, which could emanate from IT vendors and/or supply 
chain partners. Organizations that fail to prioritize these 
issues face executive fallout and brand reputation risk.
Sustaining customer loyalty
The future of customer loyalty and buying patterns remains 
uncertain. Consequently, CPG and retail respondents 
rated sustaining customer loyalty and retention as the 
sixth-ranked risk for 2024. The abundance of options and 
channels to connect with consumers is among the reasons 
why companies find it harder to maintain customer loyalty. 
Loyalty between brands and consumers is being tested as 
mergers and acquisitions disrupt the marketplace.
Still, customer experience needs to be a focal point and 
an important battleground for brands to consider. Great 
products and services are no longer enough; the consumer’s 
experience with purchasing and utilizing the product or 
service has to be a priority as well. Brands should make 
decisions with the mindset that they cannot prioritize their 
own interests over customer satisfaction.
The big picture: Looking a decade ahead
Due to the current challenging business environment, 
many CPG and retail organizations are primarily focused 
on maintenance work rather than funding transformational 
programs. This lack of forward investment and focus on 
routine operations are likely to continue until there is more 
clarity and confidence in the business environment. 
Like in previous years, CPG and retail respondents were 
asked to look into their crystal ball and identify risk issues 
they expect over the next decade. The ability to attract, 
develop and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor 
expectations, and address succession challenges came in at 
No. 1, followed by the rapid speed of disruptive innovations, 
and sustaining customer loyalty and retention.
Customer experience needs to be a 
focal point, and brands should make 
decisions with the mindset of improving 
the customer experience continuously.
Hospitality Industry
The industry is slated to record its best year ever in 2023, 
a reflection of its resilience in the face of major headwinds 
and years of setbacks. Still, industry leaders are concerned 
about several major risks heading into the new year, 
including a potential return of effects of the pandemic.
Cyber threats is top on the list of risks for hospitality 
executives. This is no surprise. In recent months, there has 
been a rise in reported cyberattacks using malware in the 
gaming industry. The liability exposure and reputational risk 
here are significant because the gaming industry collects a 
vast amount of personal data and preference information 
from its guests, making it a prime target for cyberattacks.
In addition to the cyber threats, the hospitality respondents 
identified the rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters 
and pandemic-related government policies and regulations 
as their top three risks for 2024. Rising labor costs and 
adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills round 
out the top five.
107

In recent years, the lodging industry (e.g., hotels, motels, 
resorts, timeshares) has been focused on updating 
their technology infrastructure, especially guest-facing 
technology, which is important for enhancing guest 
experiences and streamlining processes. Interactive 
gaming and online gaming providers are also driving the 
development of new systems and infrastructure.
Clearly, the industry is still mindful of the impact of the 
pandemic and its lingering effects. The cruise line segment, 
for example, experienced significant losses during the 
pandemic and is now navigating the uncertainties of 
potential future disruptions. Given the pandemic experience, 
it makes sense that executives fear that a turn of events, such 
as a COVID variant or a decline in consumer confidence, 
could have a material impact on the industry’s recovery.
The worry over natural disasters makes sense given the 
location of properties and the fact that safety and security 
of guests and employees is always a top priority for the 
industry. It may also be related to increased focus on 
ESG, and consumer expectations around the “E” in ESG or 
environmental responsibilities.
The high labor cost is both a reflection of inflation and 
the effects of the exodus of workers in the wake of the 
pandemic. According to the Journal of Hospitality and 
Tourism Management, the hospitality industry lost more 
than 8.2 million jobs between February and April of 2020, 
making it the hardest-hit industry in the United States.
Airline Industry
Airline executives cited increased labor costs, geopolitical 
shifts and regional conflicts, and economic conditions, 
including inflation, as their top 3 risks issues for 2024. Like 
hospitality, the airline industry is expected to return to 
profitability this year after several years of disappointing 
financial performance.
But even with the strong recovery, the industry is keeping 
a close eye on the macroeconomic picture, which continues 
to create a lot of uncertainty. For the industry, higher costs 
relating to energy prices and labor, and an escalation in 
geopolitical events, are big risks that could reverse the 
already fragile gains made toward profitability.
108

FIGURE 23A
Manufacturing and Distribution — 2024
FIGURE 23B
Manufacturing and Distribution — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Economic conditions, including
inflationary pressures 
5.83
6.09
5.73
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.80
5.98
5.78
O
Cyber threats 
5.73
5.55
5.61
O
Uncertainty surrounding core supply
chain ecosystem
5.59
6.42
6.45
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.35
5.50
5.36
S
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.24
6.26
5.74
O
Cyber threats 
6.13
5.74
5.27
O
Growing focus on climate change and other 
sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as 
expectations of key stakeholders 
6.06
5.87
5.16
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.06
5.62
5.44
S
Economic conditions, including
inflationary pressures 
6.04
5.95
5.48
M
4
5
6
7
8
109

Commentary — Manufacturing and 
Distribution Industry Group
BY SHARON LINDSTROM
GLOBAL LEADER, MANUFACTURING AND DISTRIBUTION 
INDUSTRY PRACTICE, PROTIVITI
In an ever-evolving and rapidly changing business landscape 
for manufacturing and distribution organizations, 
executives and boards are challenged to navigate myriad 
risks, particularly as their businesses continue to play 
catch-up on numerous fronts in areas such as innovation 
and digital transformation. The risks these organizations 
face, both short- and long-term in nature, represent a 
complex array of external and internal factors ranging 
from talent management, cyber threats and supply chain 
dynamics to economic and inflationary concerns, regulatory 
changes and scrutiny, and technological advancements.
Overview of top risk issues in 2024
For the coming year, economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures, represent the most significant risk 
for manufacturing and distribution organizations. Despite 
positive trends in demand and production over the past 
several months, the looming specter of inflation remains 
a concern amid broader global uncertainty. Of note, the 
Manufacturing Purchasing Managers’ Index (PMI) has been 
showing an uptick in recent months, indicating a positive 
trajectory, but the industry understandably remains 
cautious. Notably, this concern is expected to decrease 
in significance over the next decade, dropping to the fifth 
position in terms of long-term risks for 2034.
A growing number of bad attackers see 
manufacturing OT environments as 
opportunities to execute ransomware 
attacks on these organizations, increasing 
their cyber risk profiles even more. 
The challenge of attracting, developing and retaining top 
talent remains high on the list of risks manufacturing and 
distribution organizations face — an ongoing situation 
compounded by shifts in expectations among workers as well 
as succession challenges. Skills shortages continue to fuel 
low unemployment rates (in the range of 3%) throughout the 
industry. Specific manufacturing-heavy regions also continue 
to experience scarce talent availability — a persistent issue 
for organizations that have locations in more non-urban 
areas, making it difficult to compete with job opportunities in 
more popular urban areas.
In a related finding, rising labor costs appear to be of less 
concern, having dropped in importance on the list of top 
risks for the industry group. Further, the decline is more 
pronounced than in other survey results, indicating a shift 
in the industry’s focus from labor cost concerns to broader 
challenges such as talent management, cybersecurity and 
supply chain resilience.
Similar to most other industries, cyber threats have 
resurfaced as a top concern for manufacturing and 
distribution organizations, likely due to perceived 
vulnerabilities in operational technology (OT) systems 
as well as the proliferation of IoT-connected devices 
and technologies within industrial environments. 
Manufacturers historically have not been viewed as prime 
targets for cyber attacks. Consequently, vulnerability 
management has not been a focus in the same way that 
it has for organizations in other industries (for example, 
financial services and retail). However, a growing number 
of bad actors see manufacturing environments as 
opportunities to execute ransomware attacks because 
they can be deployed in industrial environments that tend 
to be older and run on limited hardware that lacks readily 
available protections, such as anti-malware, anti-virus 
and on-device monitoring solutions. This increases the 
industry’s cyber risk profiles even more.
Additionally, manufacturers that produce IoT-connected 
goods must ensure the security of their products to their 
markets to minimize brand and reputation risk of a breach.
110

Another key point: New SEC-required cyber disclosures 
have elevated the importance of cybersecurity for publicly 
held companies in the industry, bringing added attention to 
the potential disruption of production processes. 
Concerning supply chain risks, the uncertainty surrounding 
the core supply chain ecosystem has shifted from being 
the top concern in recent years to the fourth position 
for 2024. Factors contributing to this change include 
the industry’s recovery from severe pandemic-related 
supply chain disruptions, significantly lower shipping 
costs globally relative to the height of the pandemic, and 
greater investments in building supply chain resiliency and 
innovation. These are positive outcomes based on lessons 
learned in the pandemic era. Despite the moderation in 
perceived risk level, however, supply chain dynamics remain 
a significant risk, and organizations must continue to adapt 
to ongoing challenges, especially as the global business and 
geopolitical landscape continues to shift.
The manufacturing and distribution industry also faces 
heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny (the fifth-
ranked risk issue for 2024), with increased focus on 
ESG regulations and disclosure requirements, including 
cybersecurity, as noted earlier. Among the more notable 
new ESG requirements is the Corporate Sustainability 
Reporting Directive, which requires new, standardized and 
detailed sustainability reporting by companies operating 
in the European Union. This shift aligns with global trends 
and expectations for companies to operate sustainably and 
transparently. Among the challenges for manufacturing 
and distribution organizations is navigating these complex 
regulatory landscapes while maintaining operational 
efficiency.
Though not in the top five for the Manufacturing and 
Distribution industry group, other risk issues that landed 
in the top 10 are worth noting. An inability to leverage 
rigorous data analytics for market intelligence and 
increased productivity ranks sixth. This is understandable 
considering that many organizations in the industry group 
must manage disaggregated and decentralized data sets, 
along with older, legacy technology systems (making 
technical debt another challenge). As a result, extracting 
valuable, meaningful insights from this data presents a 
significant hurdle. 
Another notable risk issue for 2024 is the adoption of 
digital technologies requiring new skills that are in short 
supply. This risk presents challenges on several fronts. New 
technologies have brought about transformative benefits 
for manufacturing and distribution companies in terms of 
operational efficiency and financial performance. However, 
this paradigm shift also necessitates unique skillsets that, 
as noted earlier, are in short supply. This challenge is 
particularly acute for these companies because, on average, 
they tend to lag behind other sectors in the adoption of new 
technologies and innovations. In addition, as manufacturing 
and distribution organizations seek to expand their digital 
transformation efforts, they must navigate an increasingly 
complex ecosystem of partners. Moving to cloud-based 
solutions and integrating more technology into operations 
prompts greater reliance on third parties. While these 
changes bring strategic advantages, they also call for 
comprehensive risk management. 
Geopolitical risks are another pressing concern. Current 
global events are exacerbating geopolitical uncertainties 
with regional conflicts and instability in governmental 
regimes or expansion of global terrorism complicating 
the risk landscape for manufacturing and distribution 
organizations with international operations. The 
interconnected nature of their supply chains means that 
political instability has far-reaching implications. 
Interestingly, and consistent with results for other groups 
analyzed in our survey, resistance to change drops on the 
2024 list of top risks for manufacturing and distribution 
organizations, rounding out the top 10. However, given 
the volatility in the business environment and technology-
driven transformation underway in many companies 
111

(e.g., Industry 4.0), it’s imperative for leaders in these 
organizations to continue monitoring workplace culture 
to ensure teams are open to and embracing the use of 
emerging technologies and new ways of working.
Overview of top risk issues in 2034
Looking ahead to 2034, talent management emerges as 
the top risk issue, mirroring current trends but projected 
to grow over the next decade. The challenge lies not only 
in attracting, developing and retaining top talent, but also 
in managing shifting worker expectations and addressing 
succession challenges against demographic changes, 
perception issues around manufacturing jobs’ desirability 
compared to other sectors like retail or services, the 
aforementioned location of available jobs in more rural and 
remote locations globally, and evolving skill requirements 
resulting from technological advancements and ongoing 
transformation initiatives.
Over the next decade (and as is the case for most other 
industries), cyber threats are expected to increase for 
manufacturing and distribution organizations, necessitating 
a dual focus on OT security and IoT devices — both 
those used in manufacturing facilities as well as those 
produced and distributed by manufacturers. The increased 
connectivity brought about by Industry 4.0 creates more 
entry points for cyberattacks, while the emergence 
of sophisticated attacks and lack of preparedness 
heightens the risk. These threats will only grow long-
term as technological advances fuel greater capabilities 
among bad actors to attack and penetrate organizations’ 
technology systems. Cybercriminals already are becoming 
more sophisticated in targeting intellectual property and 
sensitive commercial data, as well as disrupting production 
lines — all of which carry serious financial ramifications.
The global focus on climate change and sustainability is 
expected to become a paramount concern for manufacturing 
and distribution organizations over the long term. The 
industry increasingly is coming under the spotlight as global 
efforts to combat climate change intensify. Particularly 
within energy-intensive sectors such as materials (cement, 
iron and steel) and chemicals, the responsibility for reducing 
carbon emissions is becoming significant. 
Over time, manufacturing and distribution organizations 
expect to face greater scrutiny and potentially more 
climate-related regulations. This is one factor driving 
the high ranking of heightened regulatory changes and 
scrutiny in the 2034 risk outlook. As noted earlier, an 
evolving landscape of ESG regulations and increased 
disclosure requirements adds further complexity to the 
compliance efforts most manufacturers and distributors 
are undertaking. These organizations must navigate this 
intricate regulatory environment while ensuring their 
operations align with sustainability goals.
A number of technology-related concerns permeate the top 
10 long-term risk issues for the industry group, including 
the adoption of digital technologies requiring new skills in 
short supply, the rapid speed of disruptive innovations, and 
existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure unable to 
meet performance expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors. These challenges underscore the gap board 
members and executives in the industry may perceive with 
regard to how their organizations are planning for and 
incorporating emerging technologies to help drive their 
businesses, as well as perceived skills and talent shortages.
112

FIGURE 24A
Technology, Media and Telecommunications — 2024
FIGURE 24B
Technology, Media and Telecommunications — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Cyber threats 
6.12
5.95
5.61
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.98
6.28
5.93
O
Economic conditions, including inflationary 
pressures 
5.92
6.14
5.75
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.80
5.98
5.73
S
Third-party risks 
5.79
5.97
5.86
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.47
6.10
5.35
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.29
6.11
6.10
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.19
6.28
5.88
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.06
6.14
5.87
O
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
5.95
6.12
5.56
S
4
5
6
7
8
113

Commentary — Technology, Media and 
Telecommunications Industry Group
BY GORDON TUCKER AND SCOT GLOVER
GLOBAL LEADERS, TECHNOLOGY, MEDIA AND 
TELECOMMUNICATIONS INDUSTRY PRACTICE, PROTIVITI
Cyber threats have reemerged as the top risk concern for 
the Technology, Media and Telecommunications industry 
group, escalated by the continued expansion of attack 
vectors and geopolitical tensions. Labor constraints and 
economic conditions, including inflationary pressures, 
follow closely at No. 2 and No. 3 respectively, according to 
Protiviti’s 2024 Top Risks Survey. 
TMT executives were asked to identify the biggest threats 
they anticipate over the next 12 months and a decade 
ahead. Many of the risks cited correlate in many ways and 
can be categorized under two broad themes: foundational 
risks, which are essentially challenges that leaders must 
address to keep their business thriving, and risks that are 
essential for continued growth and expansion.
Cyber threats
Cyber threats have consistently ranked among the biggest 
risks confronting TMT executives. However, this year, 
global geopolitical tensions, including the Russian invasion 
of Ukraine and escalating trade tensions between the 
United States and China, have exacerbated the risk.
Insider threats are a significant concern, especially as 
companies navigate hybrid work models, putting more 
security responsibility on employees. The proliferation of 
artificial intelligence, cloud computing and the Internet 
of Things, which have significantly expanded the attack 
vectors, are also major factors.
Organizations must develop robust cybersecurity and 
insider threat protection and rapid response programs to 
protect their operations, which will allow for future growth.
Tackling the talent crisis
TMT organizations are also increasingly worried about their 
ability to attract, develop and retain top talent, manage shifts 
in labor expectations, and address succession challenges.
Since the pandemic, many companies have experienced 
unusually high attrition rates, although large multilocational 
organizations that have been able to accommodate 
employees seeking to relocate or transfer to different roles 
have been less impacted. High-level departures have also 
had devastating impacts on organizations. Replacing a 
C-suite executive or senior employee can be costly, although 
companies with deeper pockets, compared to startups and 
fledgling organizations, are able to absorb the impact better.
Overall, TMT companies, small and large, are struggling 
with succession planning. Many companies do not have 
documented succession plans and frequently fail to 
adequately communicate advancement pathways and 
development opportunities to valuable team members.
The talent gap extends also to the cyber workforce, where 
companies are desperate to train the next generation 
of cyber defenders. The weakening front line against 
cyberattacks may also explain why TMT executives are 
growing more nervous about cyber threats.
Inflationary pressures
Like the talent issue, pressure from inflation is hitting TMT 
companies in several different ways, depending on market 
share, pricing power and line of business, among other 
factors. Larger tech companies have been renegotiating 
favorable prices with their suppliers and many have been 
able to raise hardware prices and pass the higher costs 
to consumers. Those that do not have the same level of 
pricing power are contending with margin compression and 
aggressive cost cutting. 
There are some signs that inflation may be cooling, but it 
remains at a level that has many executives up at night. 
TMT organizations, led by their CFOs, should lean on their 
data, predictive analytics and advanced technology tools 
to help them make better strategic decisions on ways to 
fight inflation.
114

Disruptive technologies
The impact of disruptive innovations and the ability to 
leverage new and emerging technologies to achieve 
growth is ranked fourth for 2024 by the TMT respondents. 
Closely related is a concern over the adoption of digital 
technologies requiring new skills in short supply, which is 
ranked the No. 6 top risk for 2024.
From artificial intelligence to wearable technology to 
nanotechnology to 5G, TMT companies have been the 
catalyst for many disruptive technologies, but they also 
have not been spared by disruptions associated with being 
on the cutting edge of technology.
In the telecommunications industry, for example, wireless 
carriers are competing not only with each other to advance 
5G coverage and features but also with cable providers, 
who are looking to strengthen their position within the 
broadband market.7
Generative AI is another new technology that is upending 
the TMT industry. TMT finance leaders are already using 
generative AI for critical functions such as compliance 
and regulatory reporting. The technology is also fueling 
fierce competition among companies whose chips enable 
ChatGPT. Clearly, the implications of adopting AI capabilities 
throughout the TMT industry and across society at large will 
continue to be a top risk for years to come.
Other top ten risks — and looking a decade ahead
Concern over third-party risks, ensuring privacy and 
compliance with growing identity protection expectations, 
and sustaining customer loyalty and retention are other 
2024 top ten risk issues identified by TMT leaders. 
Asked to project a decade ahead, TMT respondents cited 
cyber threats, adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills, and disruptive innovations as their top 3 risk issues.
7	 For more information, read Protiviti’s white paper, The 5G Effect — Lessons Learned from Real-World 5G Applications and the Roadmap Ahead: www.protiviti.com/us-en/whitepaper/5g-effect.
115

FIGURE 25A
Healthcare — 2024
FIGURE 25B
Healthcare — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Increases in labor costs
6.38
6.86
6.57
M
Economic conditions, including
inflationary pressures 
6.35
6.57
5.26
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
6.35
6.88
6.06
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.25
6.08
5.86
S
Cyber threats 
6.17
6.09
5.73
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
7.03
5.88
5.68
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.60
6.15
6.08
S
Increases in labor costs 
6.47
6.23
6.21
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.38
6.25
6.15
O
Third-party risks 
6.37
5.69
5.55
O
4
5
6
7
8
116

Commentary — Healthcare Industry 
Group
BY RICHARD WILLIAMS
GLOBAL LEADER, HEALTHCARE INDUSTRY PRACTICE, 
PROTIVITI
Healthcare organizations continue to face familiar 
challenges as they look at the year ahead and a decade 
out. Rising labor costs and talent shortages, along with 
anticipated changes in the regulatory environment and 
continued economic and inflationary pressures, are forcing 
healthcare organizations and their respective boards to 
take a hard look at long-term challenges to their existing 
business models and plan for how they will transform their 
organizations to address these challenges now and for the 
long run.
Continued increases in labor costs are causing significant 
margin erosion
Across the healthcare industry, the number one risk 
for 2024 is the continuing increase in labor costs. The 
tightening of the healthcare labor market, exacerbated 
by the pandemic, has caused significant margin erosion, 
particularly on the provider side. Hospital labor expenses, 
which account for half of hospitals’ total budget on average, 
increased by 20.8% between 2019 and 2022.8 Expenses for 
contract labor, leveraged as a temporary solution since the 
onset of the pandemic, have increased 258% over the same 
timeframe.9
With healthcare workers leaving the industry at high rates 
due to factors such as burnout and aging, it is imperative 
that the industry optimize and retain the labor that 
remains. The gap between staffing demand and supply has 
resulted in a 27% year-over-year increase in recruitment 
expenses. Additionally, healthcare saw an increase in 
organized labor activity in 2023, with contract demands 
for wage increases and better staffing conditions.10 The 
macroeconomic factors driving increases in anticipated 
labor costs include inflation, shortages of both clinical and 
nonclinical workers, and continued fierce competition for 
healthcare workers with in-demand skills.
Risk associated with increased labor costs are predicted 
well into the future and remain in the top five concerns 
in 2034, dropping only two positions in rank. The World 
Health Organization (WHO) Global Health Observatory 
model predicts that global demand for health workers will 
rise to 80 million by 2030 — twice the current supply — 
while the number of available health workers will reach 
only 65 million, resulting in a worldwide shortage of 15 
million workers.11 There is little relief in sight. Therefore, 
it will be essential to focus on worker productivity, 
establishing new ways of working by rethinking and 
redesigning jobs, and increasing the use of technology, 
particularly artificial intelligence (AI).
With healthcare workers leaving the 
industry at high rates due to factors such 
as burnout and aging, it is imperative that 
the industry optimize and retain the labor 
that remains.
Economic conditions, including inflationary pressures, 
continue to erode margins
Globally, healthcare organizations continue to confront 
challenging economic conditions as rising healthcare costs, 
8	 “New AHA Report Finds Financial Challenges Mount for Hospitals & Health Systems Putting Access to Care at Risk,” American Hospital Association: www.aha.org. www.aha.org/press-releases/2023-04-20-new-aha-report-finds-financial-challenges-mount-hospitals-health-systems-putting-access-care-risk.
9	 Ibid.
10	 “Healthcare labor union activity gains steam: The consequences for hospitals and health systems,” Healthcare Financial Management Association: www.hfma.org/finance-and-business-strategy/healthcare-business-trends/healthcare-labor-union-activity-gains-steam-the-consequences-for-hospitals-and-health-systems/.
11	 “Global Health Workforce Labor Market Projections for 2030,” Liu, Jenny X., Yevgeniy Goryakin, Akiko Maeda, Tim Bruckner, and Richard Scheffler, Human Resources for Health 15 (1), 2017: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12960-017-0187-2.
117

inflation, labor shortages and COVID-endemic recovery 
contribute to below-average operating margins, although 
there is improvement from pandemic lows.
Healthcare provider margins are improving at a much 
slower rate compared to the payer side. The healthcare 
provider services market grew at a compound annual 
growth rate (CAGR) of 6.3% between 2022 and 2023 
(with an anticipated CAGR of 5.3% in 2027),12 while the 
healthcare payer services market has an anticipated CAGR 
of 7.71% by 2027.13 Median margin data indicate that half 
of U.S. hospital and health systems continue to operate at a 
financial loss, with many just covering their costs in 2023.14 
This is understandable as hospitals’ total costs, including 
labor costs, increased 17.5% during the pandemic. 
Outside of reimbursement rate hikes and growth in 
market share, healthcare organizations must look to cost-
cutting measures and improvements in productivity and 
performance to improve margins. Transformational change 
will be required of organizations to maintain or return 
to positive operating margins as the global population 
continues to grow and age and value-based care models 
continue to be adopted and evolve. Across the board, 
there is potential for increased costs driven by volume. 
If organizations cannot balance the costs and healthcare 
spend of consumers, the organizations risk operating on 
narrow margins.
Looking toward 2034, care delivery will continue to become 
more digital. Population health efforts will guide patients to 
the most appropriate care setting more efficiently and with 
greater care coordination. Successfully combining digital 
capabilities with population health efforts will provide for 
a higher quality of care at a much greater value, and the 
efficiencies gained should yield a positive operating margin.
Tools that support clinical decision-
making, predictive analytics and remote/
hybrid work are expected to enable a 
shift from people-driven to technology-
supported models of care.
Ability to attract and retain talent and address succession 
challenges remains a critical issue
The ability to attract and retain top talent in a continually 
tightening labor market remains one of the top five risks for 
healthcare organizations for the third consecutive year. The 
crisis in healthcare human resources has been described 
as one of the most pressing global health issues of our 
time, as the WHO estimates a global shortage of 15 million 
healthcare professionals by 2030.15
Almost one in three healthcare workers are considering 
leaving the industry due to burnout, job dissatisfaction 
and heavy demands for productivity and efficiency.16 
Throughout the industry, the largest staffing concern and 
resulting pain point over the last few years has been clinical 
staff retention.17 This troubling trend impacts not just 
the bottom line; it also can diminish the accessibility and 
quality of patient care. Innovative strategies are needed to 
meet current and future staffing demand through different 
approaches to attract, hire, train, retain, support and 
transform the workforce.
12	 “Healthcare Services Global Market Report 2022”: www.reportlinker.com/p06229152/Healthcare-Services-Global-Market-Report.html?utm_source=GNW. 
13	 “Global Healthcare Payer Services Industry Research Report, Competitive Landscape, Market Size, Regional Status and Prospect,” Absolute Reports, September 13, 2022: www.absolutereports.com/global-healthcare-payer-services-industry-research-report-competitive-landscape-market-21703171.
14	 “Costs of Caring,” American Hospital Association, 2023, April 2023: www.aha.org/costsofcaring.
15	 “Health Workforce,” World Health Organization, August 7, 2019: www.who.int/health-topics/health-workforce#tab=tab_1.
16	 “The Association of Work Overload with Burnout and Intent to Leave the Job across the Healthcare Workforce during COVID-19,” Rotenstein, Lisa S., Roger Brown, Christine Sinsky, and Mark Linzer, 2023: Journal of General Internal Medicine 38 (8): https://doi.org/10.1007/s11606-023-08153-z.
17	 “2023 NSI National Health Care Retention & RN Staffing Report,” NSI Nursing Solutions, Inc. 2023: www.nsinursingsolutions.com/Documents/Library/NSI_National_Health_Care_Retention_Report.pdf.
118

Healthcare organizations view this risk as a long-term 
concern, ranking it the fourth highest anticipated risk for 
2034. Transforming the workforce through a combination 
of job redesign, improved automation and reskilling/
upskilling workers will create new career pathways, critical 
to engaging and retaining workers. AI and emerging digital 
technologies will continue to transform how healthcare 
is delivered. Tools that support clinical decision-making, 
predictive analytics and remote/hybrid work are expected 
to enable a shift from people-driven to technology-
supported models of care.
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny are 
continuing concerns
Maintaining and managing compliance with continual 
regulatory changes and heightened regulatory scrutiny 
ranks as the fourth-highest challenge for healthcare 
organizations in 2024. The U.S. federal budget contains 
greater funding than in prior years for enforcement, 
especially related to healthcare fraud and investigative 
efforts. Priority areas include, but are not limited to:
	• Price and drug cost transparency
	• Access to quality care
	• Cybersecurity
	• Privacy (with potentially a new HIPAA regulation)
	• Medicare Advantage changes
	• Clinical research
	• Mental health
Changes in the regulatory environment, 
including requirements around the use 
of technology, will be a constant for the 
healthcare industry well into 2034, 
heightening focus on data security 
and privacy.
Cross-agency collaboration will likely continue to rise, 
especially as data analytics become more sophisticated. In 
2023, the U.S. Department of Justice, together with federal 
and state law enforcement partners, brought charges 
against 78 defendants for their alleged participation in 
fraud and opioid abuse schemes, which included over $2.5 
billion in alleged fraud.18
In November 2023, the U.S. Department of Health and 
Human Services Office of Inspector General (HHS-OIG) 
published new General Compliance Program Guidance for the 
healthcare industry, addressing topics such as federal fraud 
and abuse laws, compliance program basics and operating 
effective compliance programs. Additional segment-specific 
guidance is promised, addressing topics including compliance 
risk areas, compliance program best practices, and common 
pitfalls.19 This is another indicator that the government is 
becoming more serious about healthcare organizations having 
effective compliance programs.
Changes in the regulatory environment, including 
requirements around the use of technology, will be a 
constant for the healthcare industry well into 2034, 
heightening focus on data security and privacy. Regulations 
and enforcement associated with access to care and patient 
protections also will remain at the forefront, including 
protections to facilitate health equity. Data analytics, 
automation and AI will continue to mature and play a key 
role in fraud and abuse crackdowns across the industry.
18	 “National Enforcement Action Results in 78 Individuals Charged for $2.5B in Health Care Fraud,” U.S. Department of Justice, June 28, 2023: www.justice.gov/opa/pr/national-enforcement-action-results-78-individuals-charged-25b-health-care-fraud.
19	 “Modernization of Compliance Program Guidance Documents,” U.S. Office of Inspector General, November 2023: https://oig.hhs.gov/documents/compliance-guidance/1114/GCPG-ICPG-Federal-Register-Notice.pdf.
119

Cybersecurity, data privacy and identity protection are a 
key focus
Cybersecurity remains a top concern for healthcare leaders 
and their respective boards. Ransomware incidents are 
particularly perilous, as they can disrupt critical healthcare 
systems, putting patient safety and organizational revenue, 
compliance and reputation at risk. Because they have more 
to lose, healthcare providers and payers are prime targets.
The inherent complexity of data environments within 
healthcare, with numerous entry and exit points, further 
exacerbates the challenge of protecting patients and their 
data. Additionally, the altruistic nature of many healthcare 
professionals makes them especially susceptible to 
social engineering tactics. Outdated technology systems 
prevalent in healthcare further compound the problem by 
introducing technical vulnerabilities, particularly if they 
haven’t kept up with regular security updates.
Other emerging technologies, including the rise of AI, the 
potential ubiquity of quantum computing, the expansion 
of the Internet of Things (IoT), and the unceasing 
wave of digitization further add to the complexity. The 
continuing need to foster better interoperability in the 
healthcare ecosystem only intensifies the need for robust 
cybersecurity measures. Healthcare organizations must 
diligently plan for and invest in an enduring cybersecurity 
enhancement program.
Evolving regulatory requirements and 
increased risks of noncompliance will 
continue to increase the criticality 
of a comprehensive third-party risk 
management strategy.
For 2034, cyber threats are expected to be the number 
one risk for healthcare organizations, as they continue to 
be challenged with recruiting and retaining a specialized 
workforce capable of staying ahead of cyber adversaries. 
This will require deep technical data security skills and 
the ability to understand the complicated environments in 
which healthcare payers and providers operate. 
Cybersecurity must be an ongoing journey. Its programs 
require unwavering investment, meticulous staffing, 
cutting-edge tooling, continuous enhancement, rigorous 
assessment, relentless testing and comprehensive training 
across the vast tapestry of a healthcare organization’s 
internal practices, partnerships and vendor relationships.
While not in the top five risks for 2024, reliance on third-
party vendors continues to be an emerging long-term issue 
for healthcare organizations, ranking as the fifth-highest risk 
for 2034. As healthcare organizations struggle to keep up 
with emerging technologies and margin pressures, failure to 
manage vendor risks can leave them exposed to regulatory 
action, business outages, financial losses, litigation and 
reputational damage, and can impair the organization’s ability 
to gain new or service existing customers. Evolving regulatory 
requirements and increased risk of noncompliance will 
continue to drive the need for a comprehensive third-party 
risk management strategy.
120

FIGURE 26A
Energy and Utilities — 2024
FIGURE 26B
Energy and Utilities — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Cyber threats 
5.84
4.96
5.34
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny 
5.76
5.07
5.64
S
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters 
and weather phenomena 
5.69
N/A
5.88
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.57
5.60
5.73
O
Uncertainty surrounding core supply
chain ecosystem 
5.55
5.73
5.70
O
4
5
6
7
8
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.52
5.56
5.95
S
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters 
and weather phenomena 
6.45
6.07
N/A
O
Cyber threats 
6.44
5.49
5.23
O
Growing focus on climate change and other 
sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as 
expectations of key stakeholders 
6.36
5.55
5.93
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.11
5.65
5.63
O
4
5
6
7
8
121

Commentary — Energy and Utilities 
Industry Group
BY TYLER CHASE
GLOBAL LEADER, ENERGY AND UTILITIES INDUSTRY 
PRACTICE, PROTIVITI
Resistance to change has long been a hallmark of the energy 
and utilities industry. But forward-thinking leaders are realizing 
that the only status quo that will allow their businesses to evolve 
operationally, digitally and culturally to meet new demands and 
expectations, drive innovation, and help shape the energy industry 
of the future is one of continuous change and strategic risk-taking.
Energy and utilities companies have been under increasing 
pressure for years to modernize their operations and 
evolve to new business models that focus on sustainability. 
But transformation has been a slow and challenging 
process for many of these organizations, largely because of 
substantial capital investments in the field with operations 
that serve the needs of the business for many years. A 
proof point is the presence among the top 10 risks for this 
sector, year after year, of the operational risk “Resistance 
to change in our culture may restrict our organization from 
making necessary adjustments to the business model and 
core operations on a timely basis.”
However, in our latest survey, things are markedly different. 
In 2023, resistance to change ranked sixth, but on the 
2024 list, it has tumbled to 12th. Looking further out into 
the future, we see an even more dramatic drop in the level 
of concern for this risk. Industry leaders ranked it second 
last year on their list of top risks for the next decade — but 
this year, it has plummeted to 22. That this risk is no longer 
viewed as a key concern, especially over the longer term, 
suggests that many energy and utilities executives now see 
change as the “new normal” for their companies and industry. 
The recent pandemic’s disruption is certainly one factor 
for this shift in attitude toward change — particularly, the 
need to adapt to it and to drive it as a way to increase agility 
and resilience. But there is also recognition in this industry 
that the shift toward more renewable and sustainable 
activities will continue and likely accelerate, and companies 
must respond effectively to that. Some energy and utilities 
businesses have already created a roadmap for how they 
want and need to make an energy transition over time, and 
thus have more confidence about pursuing change.
Rapid advancements in technology and a need to be more 
agile are also breaking down the resistance to change 
within energy and utilities companies. More to the point, 
there is greater acceptance in their organizational cultures 
that this type of change is inevitable — and necessary. Many 
companies in the industry are well along with their digital 
transformation efforts and are looking to evolve further to 
take advantage of the latest trends, like AI. And as they, and 
their competitors, start to realize bottom-line benefits from 
their investments, resistance to change as an operational 
risk will continue to fade.
Cyber threats and increased regulatory pressure top the 
risk leaderboard for 2024
In our previous Top Risks Survey, we found that operational 
issues were a priority focus for energy and utilities leaders 
in 2023. The same is true for 2024, although the top-
five lineup now includes a strategic risk in the No. 2 spot: 
heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny. That this risk 
has catapulted into the top five from 16th place in 2023 
indicates that industry leaders are likely wondering what 
the outcome of this election cycle could mean for the future 
regulatory landscape. 
Mandates related to ESG issues — particularly, greenhouse 
gas emissions reporting — are also top of mind for leaders 
in the industry. They also see this as an ongoing challenge 
for their organizations: They rank this risk fourth among 
the top concerns for the industry in 2034, pulling it up from 
eighth place on the 10-year outlook list last year.
One operational risk that has skyrocketed into the top five 
for 2024 is cyber threats, up from 17th place last year. This 
is an acknowledgement by energy and utilities executives 
122

that their critical infrastructure businesses are, and will 
remain, a focus for adversaries. 
Ransomware is an ongoing concern for this industry, as are 
supply chain attacks. And while businesses in this industry 
have transformed digitally to a large degree, particularly 
in their back-office operations like finance and accounting, 
many still rely heavily on legacy technology, like SCADA 
systems, for industrial operations, which can be vulnerable 
to attack. The adoption of new technology to be more 
connected to the field also creates new security risks for 
energy and utilities companies.
Supply chain uncertainty has lessened — but remains a key 
concern
Rounding out the top five risks for 2024 is “uncertainty 
surrounding our organization’s core supply chain.” This 
risk dropped from second place on last year’s list, which 
suggests that pandemic-driven supply chain disruption 
in areas such as production and delivery has eased. Many 
companies in the energy and utilities industry have also 
made a concerted effort in recent years to modernize their 
supply chain and make it more resilient. That includes 
developing formal supply chain capabilities and investing in 
new technologies to increase visibility and predictability.
What hasn’t changed for the industry, though, is how reliant 
energy companies are on their supply chains in general. We 
have reported this in previous Top Risks Survey reports, but 
it is worth underscoring once again that supply chain risk 
is both significant and persistent for the energy industry 
because its value chain is highly service-, feedstock-, parts- 
and equipment-oriented.
Another factor contributing to uncertainty about supply 
chain viability may stem from the fact that many companies 
in the energy and utilities industry are embracing new 
business models and innovating new products and services. 
Thus, they may be facing the need to alter the makeup of 
their supply chain ecosystem to support those initiatives 
and work with new and untested partners.
Worries about changing workplace dynamics and 
weather-related risks have also eased
In our previous Top Risks Survey, it was clear that evolving 
workforce dynamics were weighing heavily on the minds of 
many executives in the energy and utilities industry. But a 
year later, it appears those worries have largely subsided. 
Challenges in sustaining culture due to change in the overall 
work environment, like the shift to hybrid work, is an 
operational risk that has diminished, dropping from fourth 
place on the 2023 list to 14th for 2024. Also, the risk of 
managing demands on or expectations of the workforce to 
work remotely or as part of a hybrid work environment fell 
from fifth place last year to 25th in this year’s survey.
However, it is worth noting that the leaders of energy 
and utilities businesses are still concerned about the risk 
pertaining to their organization’s ability to attract, develop 
and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges. The ranking of this 
risk changed only slightly from last year’s survey, moving 
from third to fourth place. This indicates that many energy 
and utilities companies are still struggling to recruit an 
ample supply of talent to replace retiring workers and 
take on new jobs that require specialized skills and digital 
savvy. Another ongoing challenge is attracting younger 
professionals, many of whom prioritize working for 
sustainable companies, to take a job in an industry that they 
associate with unfavorable environmental impacts.
Energy and utilities executives are also somewhat less 
concerned than they were a year ago about their companies 
facing operational challenges due to extreme weather 
threats. The No. 1 risk cited by these leaders last year 
was the rising threat associated with catastrophic natural 
disasters and weather phenomena creating significant 
operational challenges that threaten a company’s assets, 
123

employees, and ability to deliver products and services to 
customers. This year it ranks third, after cyber threats and 
regulatory changes. 
This risk’s slight slide within the top-five ranking may be 
another indicator that energy and utilities companies are 
coming to grips with the idea of change — and disruption 
— as their new status quo. Extreme weather events are, 
unfortunately, the new normal. In 2023, we saw historic 
heat, wildfires and storms, all of which had impacts on 
critical energy infrastructure in one way or another. And 
the reality is, no matter how much an oil and gas company 
or an electric utility does to increase its resilience and 
protect its infrastructure, no measure is 100% foolproof 
against the unpredictable forces of nature.
Looking ahead: The top risks for 2034 at a glance
The energy and utilities executives who responded to our 
latest Top Risks Survey anticipate that their businesses will 
be focused on managing a mix of operational and strategic 
risks in 2034.
The two strategic risks are related to regulatory pressures: 
heightened focus on regulatory changes and scrutiny and 
growing focus on climate change and other sustainability 
policies, regulations and expanding disclosure requirements 
as well as expectations of key stakeholders. These findings 
signal that industry leaders expect their industry, which is 
already highly regulated, is poised to become even more 
so as the focus on climate change, sustainability and other 
issues continues to intensify.
Cyber threats, an operational risk, ranks third among the 
top five risks for 2034, moving up from 11th on last year’s 
list looking out 10 years. Leaders in the energy and utilities 
industry clearly understand that their businesses will likely 
remain a favored target for cyber attackers, including nation-
state actors. However, that the cyber threats risk does not 
rank first, as it does on the 2024 list, may be a sign that these 
executives are hopeful they will have better cyber defenses 
in place by 2034 — including intelligent, AI-powered 
solutions that can keep pace with rapidly evolving threats.
The rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters and 
weather phenomena is another key concern for 2034, but it 
has dropped to second place after ranking first on last year’s 
list. Industry leaders also foresee continued challenges in 
attracting talent; this operational risk moves up to the fifth 
spot from sixth place in the previous year’s top risks ranking.
Notably, we see risks related to the adoption of digital 
technologies and the ability to use data analytics for 
competitive advantage falling out of the top five list for 
energy and utilities companies in 2034. In fact, the latter 
risk ranks 14th, dropping from fourth place. Concerns 
about the rapid speed of disruptive innovation, which was 
fifth last year, is still in the top 10 — ranking seventh. 
These findings suggest executives with energy and utilities 
companies may be confident that their organizations will 
have undergone significant transformation by 2034. But 
given how quickly things change with technology and how 
much the energy industry itself is changing, they may also 
worry that their businesses will still be at risk of falling 
behind and failing to compete effectively.
Another sign of that emerging concern is the presence of 
the following strategic risk in the No. 8 spot, up from 25th 
on last year’s list: Substitute products and services may arise 
from competitors that enhance the customer experience 
and affect the viability of our current business model and 
planned strategic initiatives. This isn’t surprising given the 
growing investments in clean energy innovation and a belief 
that newer advancements will need to be made in order to 
provide the amount of clean energy needed. Maintaining 
an openness to change and having the agility to adopt new 
technologies over the next decade may be exactly what 
energy and utilities businesses need to do to keep that 
potential risk at bay — or, at least, minimize its impacts.
124

FIGURE 27A
Government — 2024
FIGURE 27B
Government — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.88
6.38
5.37
O
Cyber threats 
5.63
5.50
5.34
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.38
6.10
4.87
M
Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet
performance expectations as well as
“born digital” competitors 
5.37
6.06
5.35
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.33
5.38
5.23
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.42
5.19
5.11
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.33
6.25
5.77
O
Rising threat of catastrophic natural disasters 
and weather phenomena 
5.93
5.06
N/A
O
Third-party risks 
5.86
5.44
4.77
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.74
6.06
6.24
M
4
5
6
7
8
125

Commentary — Government Services 
Industry Group
BY CHARLES DONG
GLOBAL LEADER, PUBLIC SECTOR INDUSTRY PRACTICE, 
PROTIVITI
With a few notable exceptions, the global risk landscape for 
government services organizations (specifically, agencies 
and departments within the government sector) in 2024 and 
2034 looks similar to our survey results from the past two 
years. However, the fact that issues related to talent, cyber 
threats and legacy IT infrastructure remain ongoing — and in 
many cases intensifying — concerns for government services 
leaders may reflect the need for wholesale changes in how 
these risks are addressed and mitigated. 
This is the case because the nature, magnitude and 
causes of these challenges remain anything but steady. 
The methods that bad actors (including but not limited to 
nation-states) deploy to breach cyber defenses continue to 
evolve at an accelerating pace at the same time that attack 
vectors are expanding throughout government agencies 
due to digital accessibility and other factors. This explains 
why cyber threats are rated as a higher concern for 2024 
than they were in last year’s survey for 2023 — and also 
why they expect cyber threats to become significantly more 
problematic by 2034. 
The ability of government organizations to attract, develop 
and retain top talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges faces additional 
headwinds as labor costs remain high and as an outsized 
portion of the public-sector workforce nears retirement 
age. The scope, cost and time required to replace legacy IT 
systems are also increasing. Outdated technology systems 
limit government services organizations’ ability to meet 
performance expectations and to respond with speed and 
efficacy to unexpected crises.
As leaders of government services 
organizations focus their attention on 
the most pressing and prevalent risks 
in 2024, they should consider new 
mindsets and approaches for managing 
talent, mitigating cyber threats and 
updating legacy IT infrastructure.
Overview of top risk issues in 2024
While most of the top risk issues for the government 
services sector in 2024 relate to talent, cybersecurity 
and legacy IT environments, organizational culture and 
resilience also represent urgent concerns, as does the 
ability to respond to unexpected crises with resilience and 
agility. Government services leaders express reservations 
regarding the degree to which their organizational 
cultures encourage the timely identification and escalation 
of emerging risk issues. Whether the organization can 
respond effectively and in an agile manner to unexpected 
crises marks another top concern. 
As leaders of government services organizations focus 
their attention on the most pressing and prevalent risks in 
2024, they should consider new mindsets and approaches 
for managing talent, mitigating cyber threats and updating 
legacy IT infrastructure. Doing so requires a solid grasp of 
the multifaceted nature of these issues.
	• Talent management: Attracting, recruiting and retaining 
skilled workers are ongoing — and borderline endemic 
— challenges within government services. These 
areas also represent a long-term problem: Survey 
respondents project talent-related risks as the second 
most significant concern in 2034, just behind cyber 
threats (see below). The historic allure of government 
service (e.g., situations such as the Cold War and Space 
Race, which provided strong, non-financial motivation) 
does not appear to be motivating younger workers to 
pursue government employment in the way people did 
in the latter half of the 20th century. Now, more “baby 
boom” engineers who leapt at the opportunity to work 
126

for space programs in the 1960s, 1970s and 1980s are 
retiring, and Gen X workers may not be far behind. From 
2020 to 2022, an average of more than 100,000 U.S. 
federal workers retired each year. That’s 36% higher 
compared to the period from 2000 to 2002, when 
approximately 76,000 federal workers retired annually.20 
Retirement-age federal employees now outnumber 
younger employees by two to one in the United States, 
where there were more full-time permanent federal 
employees in the 50—54 age bracket than any other 
age group in 2022.21 Furthermore, across the globe, 
subsequent generations are far more likely to choose 
the allure and higher pay of jobs in industries such as 
technology and financial services over government 
roles. Of note, for 2024, other talent management-
related concerns include increasing labor costs (the third 
highest-ranked risk issue) and the impact of social issues 
and DEI priorities on organizations’ ability to attract and 
retain workers (a top 10 risk issue). 
	• Cybersecurity: As is the case with talent management, 
cyber threats are an area of significant concern for 
government agencies. To illustrate, in the United States, 
over the past dozen years or so the U.S. Government 
Accountability Office (GAO) has publicly issued 
more than 700 recommendations related to securing 
federal systems and information. “Until these are fully 
implemented,” a January 2023 GAO report states, 
“federal agencies will be more limited in their ability to 
protect private and sensitive data entrusted to them.”22 
Not surprisingly, ensuring privacy and compliance with 
growing identity protection expectations also ranks 
as a top 2024 risk issue among government services 
respondents. The same holds true for third-party risks 
(ranked in the top 10 for 2024), many of which relate 
directly to data privacy and security issues.
As government services leaders address cybersecurity, 
they should keep in mind that attack surfaces are 
expanding due to digital transformation progress 
(including the widespread shift to online services) 
and the increasing adoption of Internet of Things 
(IoT)-connected networks and applications. IoT 
sensors generate more data and provide bad actors, 
who continually develop new modes of attack, with 
new opportunities to breach organizational cyber 
defenses. Smaller government organizations, including 
those at the regional, province/state, and local levels, 
are especially vulnerable to cyber threats. Smaller 
agencies and departments generally have more limited 
cybersecurity budgets and less access to the knowledge 
and skills required to create and continually adapt 
their cybersecurity capabilities to new types of threats 
and attack modes. At the same time, because these 
organizations are perceived to be easier targets to 
breach, bad actors increasingly are targeting them to 
disrupt operations and interfere with elections through 
phishing, denial of service and ransomware attacks.
As government services leaders address 
cybersecurity, they should keep in mind 
that attack surfaces are expanding due to 
digital transformation progress (including 
the widespread shift to online services) 
and the increasing adoption of IoT-
connected networks and applications.
	• Legacy IT: Government services organizations face 
scale, time, money and resource challenges when it 
comes to addressing aging IT infrastructures through 
technology modernization. Mainframe systems designed 
in the 1970s and 1980s still underpin operations in 
many government offices. These infrastructures have 
been held together with numerous makeshift, ad hoc 
solutions by systems administrators who have already 
retired or will do so soon. In addition, given their age and 
design, many legacy systems have undergone extensive 
customization. In many cases, this means that upgrades 
are off the table, and that new, modern systems must be 
20	 www.opm.gov/retirement-center/retirement-statistics/.
21	 https://usafacts.org/articles/how-old-is-the-federal-workforce/.
22	 www.gao.gov/products/gao-23-106428.
127

implemented from scratch. While time-consuming and 
expensive, such implementations are crucial to perform 
because outdated systems can limit organizational 
resilience and agility (another top 10 risk concern for 
2024) as well as the ability to recruit talented technology 
professionals who would rather work with advanced 
tools and technologies than perform troubleshooting 
and maintenance on antiquated systems. Additionally, 
more large ERP vendors are establishing definitive 
timelines for moving customers away from on-premises 
solutions to cloud environments, further underscoring 
the urgency to update legacy systems.
It is worth noting that ongoing political polarization 
and legislative gridlock frequently hinder the ability of 
government services organizations to respond to many of 
these risk issues. Budgeting brinkmanship at all levels of 
government injects additional uncertainty into planning 
and forecasting activities.
Intensifying geopolitical concerns reflect 
the wars in Ukraine and the Middle East 
as well as rising tensions between China 
and Taiwan, among other flashpoints.
Overview of top risk issues in 2034
When government services leaders share their 10-year 
outlook, cybersecurity and talent management risk ratings 
are considerably higher, and they are joined by major 
concerns related to natural disasters and regulatory 
requirements focused on climate change and sustainability. 
In last year’s survey, the rising threat of catastrophic 
natural disasters and weather phenomena barely rated as 
a top 25 risk concern. For 2024, this risk issue figures as a 
top 15 concern. By 2034, government services leaders rank 
the threat of natural disasters in their top five (specifically, 
third), with sustainability policies, regulations and 
disclosure requirements not far behind. 
Catastrophic natural disasters are not the only concern that 
government services survey respondents expect to become 
riskier during the next decade. Compared with last year’s 
survey results related to the long-term risk outlook, this 
year’s respondents gave notably higher risk ratings to many 
of their longer-term concerns — including cyber threats, 
third-party risks, and geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts 
and instability in government regimes or the expansion of 
global terrorism. 
Of note, similar to the roadblocks government agencies 
face with their 2024 top risks, political polarization and 
gridlock may inhibit their ability to respond to these issues 
effectively.
Heightened geopolitical concerns reflect intensifying 
conflicts around the world. The survey results indicate an 
expectation among government leaders that the current 
period of geopolitical conflict will sustain over the coming 
decade. Government services leaders also view cyber 
threats and talent-related risks as long-term challenges. 
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny along with 
organizational culture concerns (centered on the timely 
identification and escalation of emerging risk issues) round 
out the list of highest-rated 2034 risk issues.
128

Analysis across geographic regions
As in prior years, we obtained responses from enough 
organizations across the globe to explore results from eight 
distinct regions. We analyze responses across these eight 
regions to determine whether respondents across different 
geographic locations rank-order risks differently. Similar to 
our analysis summarized earlier in this report, we analyze 
responses about overall impressions of the magnitude and 
severity of risks across the eight regions.
The scores in Figure 28 reflect responses to the question 
about the overall impression of the magnitude and severity 
of risks using a 10-point scale where 1 = “Extremely Low” 
and 10 = “Extremely High.”
Geographic region
Number of 
respondents
North America
488
Asia
128
Australia/New Zealand
88
India
78
Europe (includes U.K.)
187
Latin America
99
Middle East
56
Africa
19
Total number of respondents
1,143
“Four of the eight regions we explore 
reveal heightened overall risk concerns 
for 2024 relative to the prior year. As 
well, all but India report an overall 
level of concern that maps to our 
designation as a Significant Impact 
risk (i.e., greater than 6.0).”
BRUCE BRANSON
ALUMNI DISTINGUISHED PROFESSOR OF ACCOUNTING 
POOLE COLLEGE OF MANAGEMENT
NC STATE UNIVERSITY
129

FIGURE 28
Overall, what is your impression of the magnitude and severity of risks your organization will be facing 
with respect to achieving your performance goals over the next 12 months?
North America
6.51
7.07
6.36
Europe
6.37
6.49
6.18
Asia
6.24
6.11
5.62
Australia/New Zealand
6.34
5.99
6.59
4
5
6
7
8
India
5.91
7.00
6.19
Latin America
6.03
6.52
6.41
Middle East
6.18
6.05
5.83
Africa
7.05
6.80
6.54
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
130

Organizations from seven of the eight geographic regions 
agree that the overall magnitude and severity of risks are of 
a “Significant Impact” level for 2024. Only organizations in 
India rate the severity and magnitude of 2024 risks below 
6.0. Four of the eight regions rate the magnitude and severity 
of risks as more severe than 2023, while the remaining 
four perceive a reduction in the overall magnitude and 
severity of risks moving from 2023 to 2024. North American 
organizations as well as those from Africa exhibit the largest 
level of risk concern for 2024, with both regions rating the 
overall magnitude and severity of risks at 6.50 or higher.
2024 risk concerns
Figures 29-36 highlight the top five risks from each of the 
eight geographic regions we examine and include the risk 
scores for 2024 and, separately, for 2034, as well as, where 
available, scores for those risks reported in our 2023 and 
2022 reports. There are noticeable differences in views 
about risks around the globe, which is especially important 
for multinational organizations to consider. Fifteen of the 
36 risks appear among the eight geographic regions as top 
five risks. Operational risks dominate, with at least three of 
the top five risk issues in each region (with the exception of 
Asia (two)) being operational in nature. 
Consistent with our full sample results, the risks associated 
with succession and talent acquisition and retention and 
economic conditions are top of mind for many regions. 
All eight regions included succession risks and talent 
acquisition and retention in their top five. Six of the eight 
regions similarly include the risk associated with economic 
conditions among their top five risk concerns for 2024. 
Only two strategic risks are included among the top 
five for any of the regions in 2024: risks associated with 
regulatory change and enhanced scrutiny, and social media 
developments and platform technology innovations.
2034 risk issues
Looking further out into 2034, strategic risks become 
more heightened for all regions. Fourteen different risks 
appear in the top five across the eight regions, with six of 
these being strategic risks, four operational risks and four 
macroeconomic risks. The two most commonly cited top 
five risks, each appearing in seven of the eight regions, 
are (1) the adoption of digital technologies, with their 
implications to reskilling and upskilling existing employees; 
and (2) cyber threats. One risk appears in six of the regions’ 
top five risks for 2034: succession challenges and talent 
acquisition and retention. Finally, one risk appears in four 
top five lists: the rapid speed of disruptive innovation.
There are noticeable differences 
in views about risks around 
the globe, which is especially 
important for multinational 
organizations to consider.
131

FIGURE 29A
North America HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 29B
North America HQ Organizations — 2034
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
6.12
6.10
5.64
M
Cyber threats 
6.10
5.63
5.67
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
6.00
6.02
5.91
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.77
5.98
5.58
M
Third-party risks 
5.76
5.58
5.30
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.76
5.96
5.69
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.45
6.34
6.12
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.44
6.17
5.88
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.42
6.24
5.91
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.27
6.30
6.21
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
132

FIGURE 30A
Europe HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 30B
Europe HQ Organizations — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.03
6.10
5.96
O
Economic conditions, including 
inflationary pressures 
5.89
6.12
5.85
M
Cyber threats 
5.76
5.54
6.16
O
Third-party risks 
5.66
5.64
5.80
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.50
5.48
5.79
S
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.30
5.87
6.00
O
Growing focus on climate change and other 
sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as 
expectations of key stakeholders 
6.24
5.60
5.77
S
Cyber threats 
6.23
5.59
5.97
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.14
5.37
5.98
S
Adoption of digital technologies 
requiring new skills in short supply 
6.10
5.93
6.07
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
133

FIGURE 31A
Australia/New Zealand HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 31B
Australia/New Zealand HQ Organizations — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.08
6.48
6.66
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.98
6.06
5.38
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.83
5.51
6.08
S
Meeting expectations around protecting 
health and safety of employees (including their 
well-being and mental health), customers, 
suppliers and our communities
5.81
6.29
6.82
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.80
5.96
6.22
M
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.03
5.72
4.38
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.80
5.66
4.87
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
5.69
5.71
5.97
M
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
5.62
5.76
5.68
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.57
5.73
5.94
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
134

FIGURE 32A
Asia HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 32B
Asia HQ Organizations — 2034
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
5.81
5.69
5.59
M
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.78
5.59
5.55
M
Cyber threats 
5.78
5.68
4.99
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.67
6.10
5.31
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.66
5.72
5.29
M
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.33
6.15
5.75
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.23
5.96
5.92
M
Cyber threats 
6.23
5.70
4.84
O
Geopolitical shifts, regional conflicts and 
instability in governmental regimes or 
expansion of global terrorism
6.13
5.21
4.96
M
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
6.09
5.59
5.59
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
135

FIGURE 33A
Latin America HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 33B
Latin America HQ Organizations — 2034
Change in current interest rate environment
5.75
5.94
5.48
M
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
5.60
5.90
6.05
M
Inability to utilize rigorous data analytics 
to achieve market intelligence and increase 
productivity and efficiency 
5.46
5.70
6.21
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.42
5.72
5.69
O
Cyber threats 
5.42
5.35
5.14
O
4
5
6
7
8
Change in current interest rate environment
5.85
6.00
5.11
M
Ease of entrance of new competitors or other 
changes in competitive environment 
5.78
6.19
5.83
S
Cyber threats 
5.76
5.50
4.51
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.74
6.07
5.22
M
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
5.70
6.32
5.86
M
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
136

FIGURE 34A
Middle East HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 34B
Middle East HQ Organizations — 2034
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.14
5.81
5.43
M
Cyber threats 
6.07
5.46
4.80
O
Existing operations and legacy IT 
infrastructure unable to meet performance 
expectations as well as “born digital” 
competitors 
6.00
5.54
5.11
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.84
6.62
5.40
O
Third-party risks 
5.79
5.49
5.31
O
4
5
6
7
8
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.27
5.72
5.91
M
Cyber threats 
6.18
5.28
4.63
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.16
5.39
5.55
S
Growing focus on climate change and other 
sustainability policies, regulations, and 
expanding disclosure requirements as well as 
expectations of key stakeholders 
6.15
5.50
5.06
S
Third-party risks 
6.11
5.51
4.85
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
137

FIGURE 35A
India HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 35B
India HQ Organizations — 2034
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.97
6.59
5.23
O
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
5.95
6.28
5.23
M
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
5.92
6.17
5.05
M
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.82
5.97
4.74
O
Cyber threats 
5.81
5.43
4.81
O
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.65
6.60
4.98
O
Cyber threats 
6.55
5.65
4.07
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring 
new skills in short supply 
6.22
6.07
4.84
M
Third-party risks 
6.09
6.15
4.98
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
6.09
6.01
4.58
O
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
138

FIGURE 36A
Africa HQ Organizations — 2024
FIGURE 36B
Africa HQ Organizations — 2034
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
7.16
6.60
6.08
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.89
5.93
6.04
O
Resistance to change restricting organization 
from adjusting business model and core 
operations 
6.89
6.00
6.04
O
Social media developments and platform 
technology innovations 
6.84
6.40
5.63
S
Organization’s culture not sufficiently 
encouraging timely identification and escalation 
of emerging risk issues 
6.84
6.13
6.54
O
4
5
6
7
8
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
7.79
6.40
6.04
S
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
7.68
6.47
5.46
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
7.68
6.13
5.33
O
Social media developments and platform 
technology innovations 
7.58
6.13
5.96
S
Sustaining customer loyalty and retention 
7.58
6.57
5.52
S
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
139

Analysis across public and non-public entities
Participants in the survey represent five types of 
organizations: publicly traded companies (587 respondents), 
privately held for-profit entities with plans for an IPO (116 
respondents), privately held for-profit entities with no plans 
for an IPO (269 respondents), not-for-profit organizations 
(100 respondents), and governmental organizations (71 
respondents). For this year’s report, we provide analyses 
of the separate responses we received from not-for-profit 
organizations and from governmental organizations.23 In prior 
years we have combined these two into a single category.
We analyze responses across these five types of entities to 
determine whether different types of organizations rank-
order risks differently. Similar to our analysis summarized 
earlier, we analyze responses about overall impressions of the 
magnitude and severity of risks across the five organizational 
type categories. Again, the scores in Figure 37 reflect 
responses to the question about the overall impression of the 
magnitude and severity of risks using a 10-point scale where 1 
= “Extremely Low” and 10 = “Extremely High.”
FIGURE 37
Overall, what is your impression of the magnitude and severity of risks your 
organization will be facing with respect to achieving your performance goals 
over the next 12 months?
Public companies
6.39
6.35
6.00
Privately held for-profit companies with IPO plans
6.38
7.28
6.91
Privately held for-profit companies with no IPO plans
6.18
6.93
6.18
Not-for-profit organizations
6.77
N/A
N/A
Governmental organizations
6.08
N/A
N/A
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
23	 Please note that in addition to this breakout of governmental organizations, we also have a 
breakout of government industry organizations presented earlier in our report. We distinguish 
these two groups as follows: Government industry organizations are those that function within a 
government at the national/federal, state or local level (e.g., a government agency). Government 
organizations may be entities that, while under the auspices of a government, operate or identify 
themselves as part of another industry (e.g., financial services, healthcare). 
140

All five entity types agree that the overall magnitude and 
severity of risks are of a “Significant Impact” level in 2024, 
with not-for-profit organizations exhibiting especially 
elevated risk concerns.
Figures 38-42 highlight the top five risks identified by each 
type of organization.
2024 risk concerns
The top five risks across the five groups are relatively 
consistent. All five groups rank succession and talent 
acquisition and retention among their top three risks. In 
addition, economic conditions in markets currently served 
appear in four of the top five risk summaries, as does the 
risk associated with cyber threats. Third-party risks appear 
in the top five for three of the five groups.
Macroeconomic and operational risk concerns dominate 
the top five risk issues for all organizations. Only public 
companies include a strategic risk in their top five — the 
risk associated with regulatory change and enhanced 
regulatory scrutiny. No other groups include any strategic 
risk issues in their top five risk concerns for 2024. For all 
but public companies, at least three of the top five risk 
concerns are operational risk issues. 
As noted, within the privately held for-profit category, 
we captured responses from participants who classified 
their respective organizations as either “preparing to 
become publicly held” or “no current plans to become 
publicly held.” Both groups share concerns over economic 
conditions (ranked first for both) and succession and 
talent acquisition and retention risks (ranked second for 
both). As well, both groups rate the risk associated with 
third parties as their fifth-highest risk concern. For private 
companies with no plans for an IPO, cyber threats and 
risks associated with digital technologies and reskilling 
their labor force appropriately round out their top five. For 
private companies with IPO plans, risks associated with 
organizational culture impacted by the work environment 
and privacy concerns complete their top five risk concerns 
for 2024.
2034 risk issues
The risk of cyber threats is top of mind, appearing in each 
group’s top five risks list and ranked as the number one 
risk issue for public entities, private entities with IPO plans 
and governmental organizations. There are also significant 
concerns about succession and talent challenges continuing 
into the next decade, with that risk issue appearing in four 
of the top five risk summaries for 2034. The adoption of 
digital technologies and its implications for reskilling and 
upskilling existing employees is also a top five risk concern 
for four of the five groups — only private companies with 
IPO plans failed to include this risk in their top five. 
As well, rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled by 
advanced technologies appears as a top five risk for all but 
private companies with IPO plans. These firms also exhibit 
the most variation in their risk concerns for 2034 relative 
to the other groups. Three of the top five risks for private 
companies with IPO plans appear only on their top five risks 
list. All five groups include at least two operational risks and 
three of the five include at least two strategic risks in their 
lists of top five risk issues looking out a decade.
141

FIGURE 38A
Public companies — 2024
FIGURE 38B
Public companies — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Cyber threats
5.80
5.56
5.60
O
Economic conditions,
including inflationary pressures 
5.78
5.75
5.60
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges 
5.61
6.00
5.75
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
5.54
5.32
5.46
S
Change in current interest rate environment 
5.42
5.43
4.90
M
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.25
5.80
5.38
O
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
6.15
5.62
5.62
S
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, 
and address succession challenges
6.06
6.01
5.76
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.02
5.95
5.72
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.01
6.05
5.84
M
4
5
6
7
8
142

FIGURE 39A
Privately held for-profit companies with IPO plans — 2024
FIGURE 39B
Privately held for-profit companies with IPO plans — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Economic conditions, 
including inflationary pressures 
6.47
6.29
6.45
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges 
6.42
6.38
6.42
O
Challenges in sustaining culture due to 
changes in overall work environment 
6.34
6.15
6.40
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
6.33
6.00
5.86
O
Third-party risks 
6.31
6.05
6.16
O
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.27
5.92
5.47
O
Difficulty in growing through acquisitions, joint 
ventures and other activities 
5.79
6.13
5.79
S
Increases in labor costs 
5.75
6.18
6.05
M
Third-party risks 
5.65
6.07
5.97
O
Social media developments and platform 
technology innovations 
5.65
6.02
5.69
S
4
5
6
7
8
143

FIGURE 40A
Privately held for-profit companies with no IPO plans — 2024
FIGURE 40B
Privately held for-profit companies with no IPO plans — 2034
*	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our terminology to reflect a decade out, 
thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033*
2032*
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Economic conditions,
including inflationary pressures 
6.04
6.20
5.65
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
5.96
6.00
5.58
O
Cyber threats 
5.91
5.39
5.22
O
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
5.63
5.88
5.62
M
Third-party risks 
5.61
5.54
5.13
O
4
5
6
7
8
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.43
6.07
6.02
M
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges 
6.43
6.18
5.74
O
Cyber threats 
6.40
5.46
5.09
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.29
6.00
5.60
S
Economic conditions, including
inflationary pressures 
6.15
5.95
5.65
M
4
5
6
7
8
144

FIGURE 41A
Not-for-profit organizations — 2024*
FIGURE 41B
Not-for-profit organizations — 2034*
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.84
O
Cyber threats
6.63
O
Economic conditions,
including inflationary pressures 
6.55
M
Increases in labor costs 
6.46
M
Third-party risks 
6.31
O
4
5
6
7
8
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges 
7.43
O
Cyber threats 
7.41
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
7.10
S
Heightened regulatory changes and scrutiny
7.08
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply
6.97
M
4
5
6
7
8
*	 For this year’s survey, we have broken out governmental and not-for-profit organizations into separate groupings, whereas in our prior year survey 
reports we combined these two groups.
*	 For this year’s survey, we have broken out governmental and not-for-profit organizations into separate 
groupings, whereas in our prior year survey reports we combined these two groups.
**	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our 
terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2034
2033**
2032**
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
145

FIGURE 42A
Governmental organizations — 2024*
FIGURE 42B
Governmental organizations — 2034*
*	 For this year’s survey, we have broken out governmental and not-for-profit organizations into separate 
groupings, whereas in our prior year survey reports we combined these two groups.
**	 This data was reported as 2032 and 2031 results, respectively, in our prior year reports. We have shifted our 
terminology to reflect a decade out, thus have revised these year references in the interests of clarity.
2024
2023
2022
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
2034
2033**
2032**
M Macroeconomic 
Risk Issue
S Strategic 
Risk Issue
O Operational 
Risk Issue
Cyber threats 
6.44
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges
6.34
O
Existing operations and legacy IT infrastructure 
unable to meet performance expectations as 
well as “born digital” competitors 
6.10
O
Ensuring privacy and compliance with growing 
identity protection expectations 
5.97
O
Increases in labor costs 
5.86
M
4
5
6
7
8
Cyber threats 
6.99
O
Ability to attract, develop and retain top 
talent, manage shifts in labor expectations, and 
address succession challenges 
6.75
O
Rapid speed of disruptive innovations enabled 
by new and emerging technologies and/or 
other market forces 
6.43
S
Adoption of digital technologies requiring new 
skills in short supply 
6.34
M
Third-party risks 
6.29
O
4
5
6
7
8
* 	 For this year’s survey, we have broken out governmental and not-for-profit organizations into separate groupings, whereas in our prior year survey 
reports we combined these two groups.
146

Responses to open-ended questions on major 2024 concerns
In our survey, we invited respondents 
to answer three open-ended questions 
seeking additional insights. After 
analyzing the responses received, we 
elected to present those received on 
two of the three questions.
The first question we selected to 
include in this report asked:
Looking to 2024, are there developments 
or issues that present especially significant 
or out-weighted effects on your business?
The words portrayed in the word cloud 
on this page capture the essence of 
the responses received on the above 
question.
Interestingly, the focus of the responses 
is predominantly on significant change in 
the business and its operations as well as 
key drivers of change — regulations, cost 
structure, interest rates, cybersecurity, 
inflation, supply chains and the economy. 
The company’s markets, customers and 
competition as well as the geopolitical 
environment, climate issues and 
labor markets were also mentioned. 
In addition, the responses address 
important enablers to managing change, 
e.g., strategy, data, technology, systems 
and information.
The above themes relate to a number of 
risks ranked highly in our overall survey 
results, as previously discussed in this 
report. Without question, leaders have a 
lot on their minds as they approach 2024. 
147

The second question we selected asked:
Are there any risk issues that are of 
particular significance to your organization 
or the overall risk environment for 2024 
and/or 2034?
The words portrayed in the word cloud 
on this page capture the essence of the 
responses received on this question.
The responses point to a number of 
near-term and long-term themes 
highlighted in this report. With respect 
to the long term, that cybersecurity is 
displayed prominently is no surprise 
as it was the top risk concern looking 
out 10 years. The responses also refer 
to technology, people, leadership, the 
economy, the industry, regulations, 
employees, competition, customers, 
operations, and the geopolitical and 
political environments — issues that 
relate either directly or indirectly to 
the top 10 risks for 2034. Reference is 
also made to climate issues which is the 
13th-rated risk long-term. Interestingly, 
there are references to population, 
government, DEI and supply sources. 
These responses, once again, reflect 
wide-ranging issues and challenges 
that are top of mind for leaders across 
the globe.
148

Plans to deploy resources to enhance risk management capabilities
Recall that we asked respondents about their overall 
impression of the perceived magnitude and severity of risks 
to be faced in 2024. (Note that we did not ask participants 
to consider this for 2034.) As illustrated in Figure 43, the 
average overall response indicates a perceived decrease in 
the nature of the overall risk environment, with an average 
score of 6.35 in 2024 relative to 6.70 in 2023 but higher 
than the 6.21 reported in 2022. Also, last year we added 
a new category of responses received from CHROs, who 
rated the overall magnitude and severity of risks as 8.10 
in 2023, as compared to the CHRO assessment of 6.02 for 
2024. We believe that the decline in their ratings from 2023 
to 2024 has contributed to the lower overall assessment in 
magnitude and severity of 6.70 in 2023 to 6.35 in 2024 for 
the full sample.
We also asked executives to provide insights into whether 
their organization plans to devote additional resources 
to improve risk management capabilities over the next 
12 months. We used a 10-point scale, whereby 1 signifies 
“Extremely Unlikely to Make Changes” and 10 signifies 
“Extremely Likely to Make Changes.”
Consistent with the decrease in the perception of the risk 
environment, respondents indicate a lower likelihood of 
deploying more resources to risk management in 2024 
relative to 2023 (and 2022), as reflected by Figure 44.
FIGURE 43
Magnitude/severity of risks
2024
2023
2022
6.35
6.70
6.21
4
5
6
7
FIGURE 44
Likely to devote additional resources 
to risk management
2024
2023
2022
6.21
6.75
6.39
4
5
6
7
Even with this decline, there continues to be a need to 
invest in more robust risk management capabilities. The 
decline is perhaps partially explained by the significant 
increase in investment that has occurred over the past few 
years, largely driven by the need to improve organizational 
resilience pursuant to navigating the challenges posed by 
the pandemic. That experience highlighted the need for 
preparedness and agility as well as demonstrated that 
companies can innovate relatively quickly. 
149

Organization size analysis
We also analyze responses to these questions across 
different sizes of organizations. This year we observe that 
all organizations indicate a decrease in the likelihood of 
greater investment in risk management resources. As 
discussed above for the full sample, we believe this result 
is largely driven by increased investment in prior years, 
leaving little room for continued increases. It is worth 
noting that the largest organizations are more likely to 
devote additional resources to risk management relative to 
smaller-sized organizations.
FIGURE 45
How likely or unlikely is it that your organization will 
devote additional time and/or resources to enhance its risk 
management capabilities over the next 12 months?
2024
2023
2022
Revenues $10B or greater
6.52
6.70
6.30
Revenues $1B through $9.99B
6.07
6.72
6.52
Revenues $100M through $999M
6.29
6.84
6.53
Revenues less than $100M
6.01
6.84
6.07
4
5
6
7
8
150

Respondent position analysis
Interestingly, all positions indicate a decrease in the likelihood of committing enhanced resources to risk management capabilities in 2024. 
Our new group added last year, CHROs, exhibits the largest reduction of likelihood of increased investment in the coming year. CIO/CTOs 
signal the greatest desire to devote additional resources to risk management relative to all other executive positions.
FIGURE 46
How likely or unlikely is it that your organization will devote additional time and/or 
resources to enhance its risk management capabilities over the next 12 months?
Board 
Member
6.29
6.62
6.62
CEO
6.10
6.60
6.52
CFO
6.13
6.69
6.22
CHRO
6.00
8.11
N/A
4
5
6
7
8
CRO
6.15
7.14
6.24
CAE
6.35
6.47
5.80
CIO/CTO
6.49
6.54
6.69
4
5
6
7
8
CSO
5.63
6.76
5.69
CDO
6.02
6.67
5.84
OCS
5.95
6.67
6.54
4
5
6
7
8
2024
2023
2022
151

Industry analysis
All of our industry groups expect less investment in risk 
management capabilities in 2024 relative to 2023. This 
may simply reflect the increased investments already 
made in prior years, as noted previously. The Financial 
Services industry group leads in both absolute terms for 
2024 (6.59) and in the magnitude of the decrease from 
2023 expectations, which is relatively small (from 6.79 
in 2023). The Consumer Products and Services industry 
group indicates the largest decrease in the level of likely 
investment in risk management capabilities in 2024 
relative to 2023.
FIGURE 47
How likely or unlikely is it that your organization will devote additional time and/or 
resources to enhance its risk management capabilities over the next 12 months?
Financial Services
6.59
6.79
6.88
Consumer Products 
and Services
6.28
7.02
6.29
Manufacturing and 
Distribution
6.12
6.30
5.94
Technology, 
Media and 
Telecommunications
6.05
6.73
6.28
4
5
6
7
Healthcare
6.23
6.55
5.90
Energy and Utilities
6.10
6.19
6.24
Government
5.84
6.50
5.91
4
5
6
7
2024
2023
2022
152

Geographic region analysis
Organizations with headquarters based in Asia, Australia/New Zealand, and the Middle East are the only regions that indicate an 
increased likelihood that they will devote additional resources to risk management in 2024, with all signaling a modest increase 
relative to 2023. The other five geographic regions we study all report a reduced likelihood of additional investment in risk 
management capabilities as compared to the 2023 results, perhaps caused by the increased investments they forecasted for 2023 
in our prior year report.
2024
2023
2022
FIGURE 48
How likely or unlikely is it that your organization will devote additional time and/or 
resources to enhance its risk management capabilities over the next 12 months?
North 
America
6.16
6.99
6.50
Europe
6.06
6.46
6.54
Asia
6.52
6.22
5.83
4
5
6
7
8
Australia/
New 
Zealand
6.28
6.23
7.09
India
6.60
7.44
6.21
Latin 
America
6.00
6.84
6.06
4
5
6
7
8
Middle 
East
6.36
6.28
5.89
Africa
5.47
6.60
6.63
4
5
6
7
8
153

Organization type analysis
For the three groups where we have prior year data for 
comparison, all indicate lower levels of likelihood that 
they will invest more time and resources in building out 
their risk management infrastructure in 2024 relative to 
2023 (and 2022 as well). Not-for-profit and governmental 
organizations indicate similar likelihoods of additional 
investment in 2024 (6.13 for governmental organizations 
and 6.08 for not-for-profits).
FIGURE 49
How likely or unlikely is it that your organization will devote additional time and/or 
resources to enhance its risk management capabilities over the next 12 months?
2024
2023
2022
Public companies
6.23
6.49
6.33
Privately held for-profit companies 
with IPO plans
6.34
7.02
6.73
Privately held for-profit companies with no 
IPO plans
6.19
6.96
6.34
Not-for-profit organizations
6.08
N/A
N/A
Governmental organizations
6.13
N/A
N/A
4
5
6
7
8
154

Evaluating an organization’s approach to risk oversight
This report provides insights from 1,143 board members 
and executives about risks that are likely to affect their 
organizations in the short term (over the next 12 months) 
and over the next decade (2034). Our respondents reveal 
that the scope of global risks has become more varied, and 
the number of different risks rated as top risk concerns is 
only growing in nature and type. There are noticeable shifts 
in what comprise the top risks for 2024 relative to last year, 
with many of those risks having a lingering impact that 
may extend a decade or more, reminding executives that 
risks are constantly emerging. In addition, the interrelated 
nature of the top risks noted in this year’s survey makes for 
risk profiles that are nuanced and complex to manage.
Ongoing events continue to present major challenges for 
the next 12 months. The level of uncertainty in today’s 
marketplace is rapidly evolving and presenting new risks 
that many previously thought were unimaginable. The 
ever-changing risk landscape and the overall perceived 
magnitude and severity of risks should prompt boards and 
senior executives to scrutinize closely the approaches their 
organizations use to keep an eye on risks emerging around 
the corner.
Unfortunately, some organizations continue to manage 
risks the way they have for many years, even though the 
profile of risks is evolving and the frequency and velocity 
of unexpected, disruptive events increase. As business 
transforms because of the rapidly advancing digital 
economy, game-changing innovations such as generative 
AI, and shifting geopolitical conditions, the risk profile is 
most certainly not yesterday’s risks. A focus on financial 
and compliance risks using static analog-age tools without 
any conception of the organization’s risk appetite leaves 
decision-makers across the organization to their own 
devices. Soon those organizations may realize, once it’s too 
late, that their level of investment in risk management and 
willingness to engage in robust tools to identify, manage 
and monitor risk are inadequate.
The focus today is on agility and resilience as much as 
it is on prevention and detection. It is about providing 
information for decision-making and enabling the 
organization to be more anticipatory and prepared. Now 
may be an opportune time for boards and C-suites to 
examine closely how their organizations approach risk 
management and oversight in the digital age to pinpoint 
aspects requiring improvement. 
The focus today is on agility and 
resilience as much as it is on 
prevention and detection. It is 
about providing information for 
decision-making and enabling 
the organization to be more 
anticipatory and prepared.
155

In the interest of evaluating and improving risk management 
capabilities in light of the findings in this report, we offer 
executives and directors the following diagnostic questions 
to consider when evaluating their organization’s risk 
assessment and risk management processes. A “no” response 
to any of the following questions should be considered as a 
possible area of improvement. These diagnostic questions 
focus on assessments of these five fundamental elements of 
an effective risk management approach:
1.	
Robustness of risk management in light of the evolving 
business and geopolitical environment
2.	
Strategic positioning of the risk management process
3.	
Accountabilities for ownership of risks
4.	
Effectiveness of board communications about 
enterprisewide risks 
5.	
Influence of leadership and culture on risk management
Specific assessment questions for each of these themes are 
provided below to help guide discussions among executives 
and boards to pinpoint opportunities for risk management 
enhancements.
Diagnostic theme: Assessing whether 
our risk management approach is 
sufficiently robust in light of our 
evolving business environment
Because risks are constantly changing, the risk management 
process needs to be repeatable, clearly defined and 
adequately resourced to ensure business leaders receive the 
information they need to stay abreast of emerging issues:
	• Is the process supported by an effective, robust 
methodology that is definable, repeatable and 
understood by key stakeholders?
	– Does our approach to risk identification foster 
consideration of risks that may have a higher- 
level strategic impact and that may be triggered 
by external events or competitor actions that are 
beyond our organization’s control?
	– Does the process delineate the critical enterprise 
risks from the day-to-day risks of managing the 
business so we are able to focus the C-suite and 
boardroom dialogues on the risks that matter most?
	– Do we engage all the right stakeholders in the risk 
identification process?
	– Would most stakeholders describe our approach to 
risk management as one that is dynamic, engaging 
and insightful versus one that is stale, siloed across 
disparate functions in the organization and/or 
requiring a refresh?
	– Is our approach appropriately balanced with respect 
to focusing on the macroeconomic, strategic, 
reputational, operational and compliance risks that 
matter?
	– How extensively do we evaluate the effectiveness of 
preparedness and response plans that are intended 
to either prevent risk events from occurring or 
reduce the impact of risk events should they occur?
	• Is there a process for identifying emerging risks and 
does the risk identification process allow the board 
and management sufficient time to consider adequate 
response plans to these risks?
	• Does our management dashboard system:
	– Include robust key risk indicators that help the 
leadership team monitor shifts in relevant external 
trends?
	– Cover the most critical enterprise risks?
	– Provide an effective early warning capability with 
action triggers and decision prompts that enable the 
organization to act as an “early mover” in response 
to market opportunities and emerging risks?
156

Diagnostic theme: Assessing whether 
our risk focus is positioned to provide 
strategic value
Given the pace of change experienced in the industry and 
the relative riskiness and nature of the organization’s 
operations:
	• Are we centering our focus on risks in the context of our 
organization executing its strategy, achieving its business 
objectives, sustaining its operations, and preserving its 
brand image and reputation?
	• Is our leadership’s knowledge of top risks enhanced by 
the organization’s risk management process serving as a 
value-added input to the strategy-setting process?
	• Does our risk management process consider extreme 
as well as plausible scenarios? Do we have meaningful 
discussions of potential “black swan” and “gray rhino” 
events?
	• Does our risk management process consider a sufficient 
time horizon to pick up looming strategic and emerging 
risks (so called “gray rhinos”), e.g., the longer the horizon, 
the more likely new risk issues will present themselves?
	• Is our focus on external risks linked to geopolitical 
shifts, emerging disruptive innovations and changes in 
macroeconomic factors?
	• In our ongoing assessment of risk, do we consider the 
effects of changes in internal operations, personnel, 
processes, technologies, customer experiences, suppliers 
and third-party vendors?
	• Do we deploy scenario analysis techniques to understand 
better how different scenarios will play out to recognize 
their implications to our strategy and business model? Are 
response plans updated for the insights gained from this 
process? Are action triggers and decision prompts put in 
place to offer early warning capability? 
	• Do we encourage the identification of opportunities to 
take on more risk on a managed basis? For example, is 
risk management effectively integrated with strategy-
setting to help leaders make the best bets from a risk/
reward standpoint that have the greatest potential for 
creating enterprise value?
	• Are we monitoring the business environment over time 
for evidence of changes that may invalidate one or 
more critical assumptions underlying our organization’s 
strategy? If so, when there is evidence that one or 
more critical assumptions underlying the strategy are 
becoming, or have become, invalid, is this information 
along with actionable options presented to decision-
makers on a timely basis? Does management act in a 
timely fashion on that knowledge to revisit the strategy 
and undertake necessary mid-course adjustments?
	• Do the board and senior management receive risk-
informed insights, competitive intelligence and 
information regarding opportunities to secure early-
mover positioning in the marketplace?
Diagnostic theme: Assessing whether 
accountabilities for managing risks are 
clearly defined and supported 
Following completion of a formal or informal risk 
assessment:
	• Are risk owners assigned for newly identified risks? 
Are these owners held accountable for managing their 
assigned risks?
	• Are effective risk response action plans developed 
to address the risk at the source? Are risk owners 
accountable for the design and execution of those 
responses?
	• Is the organization satisfied that its oversight and 
governance of its business continuity planning and 
operational resilience activities are sufficient in scope 
enterprisewide and not limited to certain aspects of the 
organization (e.g., information technology, supply chain 
operations)?
	• Is there an effort to source the root causes of certain 
risks that warrant an improved understanding of how 
they can be better managed? Does the sourcing process 
look for patterns that connect potential interrelated risk 
events?
157

	• Do compensation and other incentive plans include 
explicit components related to the effectiveness of 
managing risks assigned to risk owners?
	• Have we considered how our compensation and other 
incentive plans might unintentionally trigger significant 
risks, e.g., unwarranted risk taking? 
	• Do decision-making processes consider the impact of a 
particular decision on the organization’s risk profile?
	– Is there actionable, current risk information that is 
widely shared to enable more informed decision-
making across the organization?
	– Have we sufficiently communicated the relative 
value and importance of considering risk in decision-
making across the enterprise?
	– Is the board sufficiently involved in the decision-
making process, particularly when it involves a 
significant acquisition of a new business, entry 
into new markets, the introduction of innovative 
technologies or alteration of key assumptions 
underlying the strategy?
	• Are significant risks related to the execution of the 
strategy and business model monitored over time to 
consider whether:
	– Changes or developments have occurred requiring 
corrective action?
	– The organization continues to operate within 
established risk tolerances in meeting key business 
objectives?
Diagnostic theme: Assessing whether 
communications with the board 
provide an effective enterprise view 
of top risks that is insightful for board 
risk oversight
With respect to communicating and overseeing the risk 
profile:
	• Is the board informed of the results of management’s 
risk assessment on a timely basis? Do directors agree 
with management’s determination of the significant 
risks?
	• Are significant risk issues warranting attention by 
executive management and the board escalated to their 
attention on a timely basis? Does management apprise 
the board in a timely manner of significant emerging 
risks or significant changes in the organization’s risk 
profile?
	• With respect to the most critical risks facing the 
organization, do directors understand, at a high level, 
the organization’s responses to these risks? Is there an 
enterprisewide process in place that informs the board’s 
risk oversight effectively, e.g., a risk dashboard?
	• Is there a periodic board-level dialogue with 
management regarding the organization’s appetite for 
risk and whether the organization’s risk profile is aligned 
with that risk appetite?
	• Is the board satisfied that the strategy-setting process 
appropriately considers a substantive assessment 
of the risks the enterprise is taking on as strategic 
alternatives are considered and the selected strategy is 
implemented?
	• Do the insights, intelligence and information received 
from the risk management process foster more effective 
dialogue in the boardroom and C-suite regarding future 
opportunities, exposures and vulnerabilities?
	• Given the organization’s risk profile, does the board 
periodically consider whether it has access to the diverse 
expertise and experience needed — either on the board 
itself or through access to external advisers — to provide 
the necessary oversight and advice to management? 
For example, is there sufficient digital savviness and 
experience on the board or in the boardroom?
158

Diagnostic theme: Assess the impact 
of leadership and culture on our risk 
management process
Because culture and leadership significantly impact the 
organization’s approach to risk oversight:
	• Are the board’s and C-suite’s support for more robust 
risk management processes evident to key stakeholders 
across the organization?
	– Is our risk management process helping to foster 
robust discussion and dialogue about the top risk 
issues among senior management and the board?
	– Is the board focused on advancing the organization’s 
risk management capabilities?
	• Is there a willingness among the leadership team and 
business units to be more transparent about existing risk 
issues when sharing information with one another?
	• Do we have an accurate read on how our organization’s 
culture is affecting the manner in which employees 
engage in risk management processes and 
conversations?
	• Is our culture resilient enough to pivot in response to 
shifting customer preferences, changing employee 
expectations, new competitor actions, and unexpected 
developments in the supply chain and in third-party 
relationships? 
	• Are warning signs communicated by the risk 
management, compliance and ethics, or internal audit 
functions addressed in a timely fashion by executive and 
operational management?
	• Do we have a “speak up” culture that encourages 
transparency and sharing of contrarian information and 
bad news? Are our employees convinced they can “speak 
up” without fear of repercussions to their careers or 
compensation? For example, does the process:
	– Encourage an open, positive dialogue for identifying 
and evaluating opportunities and risks?
	– Focus on reducing the risk of undue bias and 
groupthink?
	– Give adequate attention to differences in viewpoints 
existing across different executives and global 
jurisdictions?
	• Is adequate attention given to red flags indicating 
warning signs of a dysfunctional culture that suppresses 
escalation of important risk information or encourages 
unacceptable risk taking?
These and other questions can assist organizations in 
defining their specific risks and assessing the adequacy of 
the processes informing their risk management and board 
risk oversight. 
We hope the important insights about the perceived risks 
on the horizon for 2024 and a decade later (2034) provided 
in this report prove useful. We also hope that the insights, 
calls for action and the above diagnostic serve as a catalyst 
for an updated assessment of risks and improvements in 
risk management capabilities within organizations.
159

Research team and authors
NC State University’s ERM Initiative
Mark Beasley
Professor and Director of the ERM Initiative
Bruce Branson
Professor and Associate Director of the ERM Initiative
Don Pagach
Professor and Director of Research of the ERM Initiative
Protiviti
Carol Beaumier
Senior Managing Director
Matthew Moore
Managing Director
Jim DeLoach
Managing Director
Kevin Donahue
Senior Director
Antonia Laplanche
Senior Manager
Shaun Lappi
Research Specialist
160

About Protiviti
Protiviti (www.protiviti.com) is a global consulting firm that delivers deep expertise, objective 
insights, a tailored approach and unparalleled collaboration to help leaders confidently face 
the future. Protiviti and our independent and locally owned Member Firms provide clients 
with consulting and managed solutions in finance, technology, operations, data, analytics, 
digital, legal, HR, governance, risk and internal audit through our network of more than 85 
offices in over 25 countries.
Named to the 2023 Fortune 100 Best Companies to Work For® list, Protiviti has served more 
than 80 percent of Fortune 100 and nearly 80 percent of Fortune 500 companies. The firm 
also works with smaller, growing companies, including those looking to go public, as well as 
with government agencies. Protiviti is a wholly owned subsidiary of Robert Half (NYSE: RHI). 
Founded in 1948, Robert Half is a member of the S&P 500 index.
About NC State University’s ERM Initiative
The Enterprise Risk Management (ERM) Initiative in the Poole College of Management at 
NC State University provides thought leadership about ERM practices and their integration 
with strategy and corporate governance. Faculty in the ERM Initiative frequently work with 
boards of directors and senior management teams helping them link ERM to strategy and 
governance, host executive workshops and educational training sessions, and issue research 
and thought papers on practical approaches to implementing more effective risk oversight 
techniques (www.erm.ncsu.edu).
161
