Internal Audit Hot Topics
2024 Risks and opportunities


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
2
An opportunity for Internal Audit to make an impact 
In this publication, we present a collection of key risks that we believe organizations should have on their radar—and internal audit should have in their audit plans. 
Our recently updated Internal Audit 4.0 framework offers three new features that we believe can greatly enhance 
internal audit’s impact and value for your organization. By aligning internal audit's outcomes with the organization's 
purpose, accelerating organizational change and learning, and fully embracing digital technologies, internal audit 
leaders can stay ahead of the curve and continue to evolve the function to meet stakeholder needs. But, without a 
deep understanding of the risks that matter, functional improvement alone cannot maximize the impact that internal 
audit can make. 
In today's business environment, internal audit must keep pace with the hastening speed, volume, and complexity of 
risk. Against a volatile geo-political backdrop, organizations are navigating risks posed by environmental, social and 
governance (ESG) regulations, emerging technologies such as Generative AI (GenAI), and the future of work. 
As boards and management continue to grapple with these topics, the need for internal audit to provide assurance and 
timely insights is more pressing than ever before. Resilience and agility have become the key attributes required for 
organizations not only to survive but also thrive in the current environment. Internal audit has a critical role to play in 
helping organizations strengthen and maintain these traits—by providing objective advice, anticipating risk, and helping 
management to accelerate improvement in the governance, risks and controls landscape.
We are pleased to present our perspective on the most significant risks facing organizations today and what internal 
audit functions should consider including in their audit plans. Our report offers insights into the key risks that 
organizations need to prioritize, as well as strategies for internal audit to provide the assurance and insights needed to 
address these risks effectively. The list is by no means complete; nor will every topic apply to every organization. It is 
incumbent upon each entity to evaluate, rank, and prioritize these risks in relation to their own unique profiles and 
circumstances. 
We encourage you to review our report as you plan for the year ahead. Deloitte has a wealth of experience in the areas 
covered, and together, we look forward to helping your organization manage these risks effectively and emerge 
stronger and more resilient in the face of uncertainty.
Making an impact with internal audit is 
eminently achievable if you look at the 
right things (i.e., what matters to 
stakeholders); use data, experience, and 
comparative knowledge to develop a 
perspective on what you find; and deliver 
that perspective in an effective manner.
Scan the QR Code 
to visit
Internal Audit 4.0


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
3
Vision and purpose
Building a digital backbone
Enterprise trust
Controls modernization
Resilience
Environmental, Social, and 
Governance (ESG)
Disruptive technology
Human capital management
Internal Audit Hot Topics:
2024 Risks and Opportunities


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
4
Internal audit’s role in
Vision and purpose
By connecting its own raison d'être with the broader organization’s purpose, internal audit has an opportunity to 
maximize its impact.
Resilience and value are not created by accident. Many of the companies that have successfully weathered the storm 
over the last few years and have come out stronger on the other side have done so—on purpose. A significant body of 
evidence shows that an integrated purpose strategy can provide organizations with a “purpose premium,” driving 
long-term value and creating competitive advantage. Among other benefits, leading with purpose can deliver new 
revenue streams, faster growth, and an enhanced ability to attract and retain talent.
While most often considered in the context of the broader organization, the idea of a “purpose premium” also applies 
to the internal audit function. Internal Audit 4.0, Deloitte’s market-leading framework for helping internal audit 
functions set their stretch targets, envisions the future function to be purpose-driven and digitally powered. That is 
because internal audit has a largely untapped opportunity to accelerate engagement around purpose. 
By aligning its role and remit with the organization’s purpose, internal audit can maximize its impact by working in a 
more intentional way to support specific, purpose-driven, organizational outcomes; attracting top talent, who, 
research has shown, would prefer to work for purpose-driven organizations and teams; and ensuring innovation 
efforts are purpose-driven.
The path to becoming purpose-driven starts with a single step. Whether its saving money for customers, improving 
health and well-being, creating a sustainable future, or some other noble goal, every organization, every function, 
and every person has a purpose. Can you articulate yours?
Recently, the Institute of Internal Auditors (IIA) recognized purpose as part of its international professional 
practices framework (IPPF). As part of a multi-year refresh project, the content from six elements of the IIA’s 
current IPPF (Mission, Definition, Code of Ethics, Core Principles, Standards, and Implementation Guides) has 
been incorporated into a draft of the proposed Global Internal Audit Standards™and organized into five 
domains that more clearly indicate key roles and responsibilities. One of those domains is the Purpose of 
Internal Auditing, which emphasizes elements of the current definition and mission of internal audit. 
Data points 
Our view
News item
Companies anticipate a wide range of benefits from being more purpose-driven in relation to sustainability, 
with the following business outcomes ranking among their Top 3 responses: talent attraction and retention 
(52%), gains in efficiencies (52%), enhanced trust with stakeholders (51%), brand/reputation enhancement 
(49%), and risk reduction (48%).


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
5
For more information
•
Deloitte: The Value of Corporate Purpose
•
Deloitte: Why a Purpose-Driven Strategy is Good for Business
•
Forbes:  The Surging Value of Corporate Purpose
Align and refine: Make sure the three lines are aligned around 
purpose, clarifying roles and responsibilities where necessary.
Form an opinion: Develop a point of view about whether the 
organization is achieving its purpose and identify any behaviors 
or communications that contradict the organization’s purpose 
statement. 
Mind the gap: Develop recommendations to close the gap 
between leadership and employee perceptions around the 
organization’s purpose.
Envision the possibilities: Consider the attributes of a future 
internal audit function that is living and delivering on the 
organization’s broader purpose as well as its own.
Necessary evil: If internal audit is widely perceived as an 
unpleasant policing function, then it probably has failed to 
articulate its purpose or value to the broader organization clearly.
Revolving door: High turnover or lack of employee engagement 
within internal audit can be a sign that leaders are not articulating 
and communicating the function’s purpose to their own teams.
Follow the leader: It is easy for internal audit to fall into a routine 
of following the same working practices that everybody else uses. 
If your internal audit function is no different than any other in the 
industry, then it may be missing an opportunity to maximize its 
impact with purpose. 
Stuck on status quo: Ways of working need to be intentional in 
order for internal audit to make a purpose-driven impact in the 
context of the broader organization’s purpose. Value does not 
happen by accident. It is designed. 
Start at home: Articulate internal audit’s purpose and the value 
the function delivers to stakeholders in the context of the 
broader organization’s purpose. This is the top-down force that 
shapes everything internal audit does, including how it works and 
where it invests to innovate.
Plan with purpose: Identify risks to achieving the organization’s 
purpose and incorporate them into the internal audit plan. 
Walk the talk: Consider how the internal audit function can 
support the broader purpose of the organization. For instance, if 
the broader purpose is sustainability-related, internal audit could 
think about reducing its emissions footprint by traveling less.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
6
Trust is to an organization like electrolytes are to an athlete. Without it, an organization will struggle to compete. 
Leaders increasingly grasp this concept. Recent Deloitte research indicates 94% of boards believe building trust is 
important to the organization’s performance and highly trusted companies outperformlow trust companies with up 
to 4X amplification of market value.
But what exactly is trust? At its core, trust is the foundation of a meaningful relationship between an entity and its 
stakeholders at both individual and organizational levels. Trust is built through actions that demonstrate a high degree 
of competenceand the right intent. Often seen as a nebulous concept, trust actually can be defined, quantified, 
measured, and intentionally cultivated both as means of enhancing performance and mitigating risk. Deloitte, for 
instance, has identified 18 domains and 90+ drivers for measuring trust.
Simply put, stakeholders today expect organizations to do the right things and to do them well. These expectations 
run the gamut, from safeguarding customers’ private data to taking a strong stance on environmental, social, and 
governance (ESG) issues; and from providing safe working conditions to being transparent about vulnerabilities and 
risks. Meeting these stakeholder expectations consistently—by displaying capability, reliability, transparency, and 
humanity—engenders trust. Failing to meet them poses risks to the organization. Like any other performance-related 
attribute, trust indicators need to be monitored for gaps, analyzed for risks and opportunities, and ultimately assured. 
Considering these factors, along with its broad enterprise view, internal audit is a natural fit for advising on trust and 
accelerating a trust agenda.
According to the Edelman Trust Barometer, businesses and governments have historically low levels of trust, 
creating new opportunities to gain competitive advantage for those who can reverse this trend. With new 
data at its core, The Four Factors of Trust gives practical guidance to measure and build trust in critical 
stakeholder relationships. Trust ultimately comes down to just Four Factors that make up Deloitte’s HX 
TrustID™.
Data points 
Our view
News item
•
Organizations impacted by trust events fall 26-74% behind industry peers in value and their market 
cap falls by 20-56%.
•
79% of employees who highly trust their employer feel motivated to work.
•
Out of customers who highly trust a brand, 88% bought again and 62% buy almost exclusively from 
that brand.
Internal audit’s role in
Enterprise trust
As more and more businesses go bust on trust, internal audit is a natural fit for building it back and accelerating a 
strategic trust agenda.


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
7
For more information
•
Deloitte: Internal Audit’s role in Enterprise Trust
•
Deloitte: How Boards are Nurturing and Measuring Stakeholder Trust
•
Wall Street Journal: Chief Trust Officer Rising
Plan ahead: Strategize on how to engage on trust throughout the 
risk assessment. Determine how to report effectively on trust and 
related trends.
Measure up: Make trust measurement a strategic priority within 
your internal audit plan, supported by a structured framework to 
quantify trust across your internal audit services: assure, advise, 
anticipate, and accelerate.
Set the stage: Assess trust through standalone internal audit 
reviews at points in time, or through an integrated audit 
approach.
Read the room: Leverage internal questionnaires and external 
sensing to enrich your understanding of trust across different 
stakeholder groups, including employees, customers, 
suppliers/partners, and/or investors.
Free to be me: Psychological safety—the freedom to be oneself 
or to raise issues without threat of retaliation—must be present 
in order to build trust. Yet, this component is lacking in many 
organizations due to organizational culture, leadership structures, 
and the personalities involved. 
Not my problem: If you do not see clear lines of ownership or 
accountability for trust, the organization is unprepared to build it.
Blind eye: Ignoring issues surfaced through customer and 
employee surveys is a quick way to lose trust. 
Crisis mode: If leaders take a defensive stance when something 
goes awry, they do not see trust as a proactive strategy to avert or 
diffuse a crisis.
Start the dialogue: Affirm trust measurement as a strategic 
priority and a key tenant of organizational culture.
Find meaning: Define trust within the enterprise and industry 
context. What will we measure? How do we bring it to life? 
Whose trust matters? Which areas of the organization are at risk 
for losing trust? 
Work it: Embed trust throughout internal audit’s ways of 
working—in hindsight, insight, and foresight.
Do not rush: Trust must be built consistently over time. 
Exploring, diagnosing, prioritizing, and acting on trust should 
become part of the DNA of every organization embedded in how 
a company operates, rather than a one-time exercise.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
8
Since the 1970s, the lean philosophy has dominated a great deal of corporate thinking. While the idea of creating 
needed value with fewer resources and less waste has been a boon for efficiency and cost optimization, it has largely 
been a detriment to resilience. The COVID-19 pandemic exposed the downside of costing out diversity and 
redundancy in the relentless pursuit of efficiency. After experiencing critical supply shortages, resilience was suddenly 
on the tip of everyone’s tongues and at the top of many priority lists. 
Despite the renewed emphasis, many organizations are no more resilient today than they were in 2020. The reasons 
for this are many, but they all boil down to a fundamental misunderstanding. Unlike business continuity, disaster 
recovery, or information security, resilience is not a risk-and-control discipline: It is an outcome of executing risk-and-
control disciplines well and in concert with one another.
Resilience does not happen by accident. It requires alignment of language, definitions, and goals. Without that 
alignment, organizations can find themselves peddling hard but going nowhere fast. Internal audit can help 
organizations shift into gear by asking:
•
What do you want to make resilient? The “what” can be products, services, benefits, processes, facilities, and 
more. No organization can make everything everywhere resilient all at once. Instead, it needs to identify the 
“essential outcome” it provides, i.e., things that in absentia would cause harm, rather than inconvenience, to 
stakeholders.
•
How resilient are these things today? Many companies still have significant points of exposure within their supply 
chains, technologies, and third-party providers. Internal audit can help senior leadership to dig in and understand 
where the ticking time bombs are within the business architecture. 
•
How resilient do you want them to be? No impact is unrealistic in a severe disruption, but by better understanding 
how much impact the organization is willing to tolerate, you can make better choices before, during and after 
disruption. Internal audit can help the organization to determine its impact tolerance, which in turn can inform 
investment decisions about how much resilience to build.
Internal audit’s role in 
Resilience
Created by design, not by accident, resilience is the outcome of multiple risk-and-control disciplines done well and in 
coordination with each other.
The Digital Operational Resilience Act (DORA) is a European Union (EU) regulation that entered into force on 
16 January 2023 and will apply as of 17 January 2025. DORA seeks to unify the approach of financial entities
towards Information Communications Technologies (ICT) risk management, to streamline previous ICT 
regulations, with the overarching goal of strengthening the operational resilience of the financial services 
sector in Europe.
Through the EU Critical Entities Resilience (CER) Directive, the European Commission (EC) aims to enhance 
and harmonize Member States’ and organizations’ resilience plans and responses. Member States will have 
until October 2024 to transpose the CER Directive into national legislation and until July 2026 to identify 
Critical Entities and to define their resilience strategies, national frameworks for conducting risk assessments, 
and other elements of national and cross-border resilience.
Data points 
59%
The three most cited barriers to achieving 
greater resilience were scarcity of talent 
(59%), closely followed by competing 
strategic priorities and lack of 
organizational understanding of resilience 
(tied at 57%).
52%
of surveyed senior executives
say there is a common 
understanding/definition of 
resilience within their 
organizations.
67%
of surveyed senior leaders say 
resilience in their organizations 
has been impacted by regulatory 
change.
Our view
News item


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
9
For more information
•
Deloitte: The Opportunity for Internal Audit to Support Operational Resilience Implementation
•
Wall Street Journal: 4 Lines of Sight on Resilient Internal Controls
•
Deloitte, National Preparedness Commission, and Cranfield University: Resilience Reimagined: A Practical Guide for Organisations
See it like it is: Unlike business continuity, disaster recovery, or 
information security, resilience is not a risk-and-control discipline. 
You can put resilience on your audit plan, but understand that it is 
not going to be risk-and-control specific. It is about helping the 
organization to identify what is critical.
Speak the same language: Things can get confusing when you are 
doing an audit on third-party risk management, for instance, and 
the procurement team is talking about what is critical in one way; 
and the disaster recovery team another way; and the business 
continuity group in yet another way. Internal auditors can help 
their organizations come to a common understanding of what is 
critical, so they can point to duplications or synergies between 
different audits and help management to connect the dots on 
what the resilience outcomes might be.
Arrive early: If given a seat at the table upfront, internal audit can 
be a critical friend to management in illuminating blind spots and 
providing a check and challenge to different aspects of resilience 
programs right from the outset.
Got governance? There should be a single accountable body for 
resilience; a set of minimum requirements; and proper reporting 
that can inform senior management/board decision-making.
Eggs in one basket: Does your organization outsource or offshore 
certain business processes to a single shared services center? 
While great cost-efficiencies can potentially be gained, 
management should consider if a centralized strategy eliminates 
diversity and redundancy that might be useful, inadvertently 
creating a major point of potential failure.
Math problems: When embarking on significant operational 
change, management often fails to factor in the impact upon 
resilience in their business cases. Whether going live with a new 
product, undertaking a massive new IT migration, or doing major 
business restructuring, the potential costs and benefits will not 
add up unless the net resilience gain or loss is taken into account.
Excuses, excuses: Regulators in a number of industries want to 
see resilience be a part of any change the board considers. Using 
complexity as an excuse for not knowing where the weaknesses 
are does not cut it anymore.
Anticipate and assess: An organization should have the ability to 
understand the risks to high-priority products, services, and 
“essential outcomes,” and have some sort of risk-sensing in place. 
The idea is that if something goes wrong, what does the 
organization need to achieve at a minimum to continue to 
function at an acceptable level for its stakeholders?
Design for resilience. Like any desired outcome, resilience rarely 
happens by accident. Companies should deliberately architect 
themselves to be resilient rather than retrospectively trying to fit 
resilience in. This means avoiding major points of failure in how 
critical services and products are delivered, including setting 
standards or controls to ensure that dual sourcing, and succession 
planning for critical staff are in place.
Plan and prepare. Should controls fail, the organization should 
have a plan for continuing to deliver critical products and 
services, and for safeguarding their customers and stakeholders 
throughout the disruption.
Respond and recover.An organization must mobilize quickly in a 
crisis. This means being agile and flexible enough to redirect 
resources as necessary, and having robust post-event or post-
crisis review processes in place so people can learn lessons. 
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
10
Internal audit’s role in
Disruptive technology
Is the disruptive potential of GenAI the real deal or a deep fake? Internal audit can help companies decide.
Disruptive technologies, such as the cloud, artificial intelligence (AI), and machine learning (ML) are nothing new. Companies 
across industries have been using algorithms and automation to process transactions, enhance customer service, and support 
executive decision-making for years. What is new is the pace of change. 
As the latest development in the quickening evolution of disruptive technologies, generative AI (GenAI) is changing the scope
of the conversation. The main difference between “traditional AI” and GenAI is that the output is of a higher complexity in the 
latter. Rather than just a number or a label, the output can be high-level chatbot answers, multi-page business documents, 
movie scripts, videos, images, and more. Simultaneously, more mature disruptive technologies, such as cloud applications and 
infrastructure, are becoming increasingly sophisticated—often by embedding GenAI and machine learning into their 
solutions—even as companies seek to cost-optimize their cloud portfolios and align them with enterprise strategy.
These developments all point to the potential for elevated risks. What does the rapid evolution of disruptive technologies such 
as AI mean, for example, for the workforce and broader environmental, social, and governance (ESG) objectives? What data 
governance and security risks do these technologies present? What is the company’s ethos around deploying them? 
In answering these questions and more, internal audit has a key role to play in creating and protecting value by assuring, 
advising, anticipating, and accelerating the organization’s ability to both manage the related risks and take advantage of the 
opportunities posed by disruptive technologies. For instance, internal audit can help the board and management understand 
which GenAI and other disruptive technologies are leveraged in the organization and what risks they present. It can also provide
assurance over existing controls and governance structuresor advise management on their options if those structures do not 
yet exist. In addition, an effective governance and controls framework can create value by enabling the organization to scale
and drive adoption of these technologies more quickly. There is also an opportunity to turn the technology lens on the internal 
audit function itself, considering if upskilling is necessary to enable practitioners to audit algorithms, and if intelligentsolutions 
can be leveraged to improve efficiency and surface more insights for the business. 
Naturally, the rate of adoption of disruptive technologies will differ for each company, and so will the ability of internal audit to 
respond to the risks posed based on its maturity and philosophy. Nonetheless, GenAI stands poised to rock the business world.
The challenge for auditors will be how to keep pace with the shifting risk landscape to deliver insightful assurance and valuable 
advice. 
In June 2023, the European Commission changed its draft artificial intelligence rules to include a ban on the 
use of AI technology in biometric surveillance and for generative AI systems like ChatGPT to disclose AI-
generated content. The amendments to the proposed landmark law, which aims to protect citizens from the 
dangers of the technology, could set up a clash with EU countries opposed to a total ban on AI use in 
biometric surveillance. The proposed rules and the controversies around them illustrate the thorny ethical 
issues posed by certain GenAI use cases. 
Data points 
Our view
News item
>50%
of surveyed CFOs cite impact to risk and 
internal controls (57%), data 
infrastructure and technology needs 
(52%), and investment needs (51%) 
among their top three concerns regarding 
GenAI.
42%
of surveyed CFOs say their 
companies are experimenting 
with GenAI.
15%
of surveyed CFOs say they are 
building GenAI into their 
strategies 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
11
For more information
•
Deloitte: Navigating the artificial intelligence frontier
•
Deloitte AI Institute: AI and Audit: An Auditor’s Mindset in an AI-driven World
•
Deloitte: Tech Trends 2023
•
Wall Street Journal: What Generative AI can Mean for Finance
Familiarize: Learn about the underlying technologies that make 
GenAI possible, as well as the current capabilities and limitations.
Strategize: Develop a strategy for GenAI and harmonize it with 
the enterprise’s existing AI strategy as well as internal audit’s 
digital transformation plan.
Democratize: Bring together a cross-disciplinary team of people 
to democratize discussions about the potential use cases of 
disruptive technologies and associated risks.
Acclimatize: Adapt legacy technology risk frameworks to consider 
challenges around bias and misinformation, attribution, 
transparency, and enterprise accountability related to the new 
GenAI topography.
Who is the boss? Uncertainty around who owns the risk can 
indicate a precarious situation where everybody is doing 
something but nobody is in charge.
Random acts: If tactical actions are being taken and you can’t see 
the connections between them, the organization may not have 
appropriate policies, standards, and guidelines in place to 
effectively manage AI and cloud risks.
Lofty expectations: Sometimes organizations assume that cloud 
services automatically deliver cost and sustainability benefits, 
only to be surprised by larger-than-expected bills and mounting 
stakeholder concerns about energy consumption. Be prepared to 
ensure the responsible use of cloud resources to minimize 
environmental impact and maximize cost optimization.
Mum is the word: During the risk assessment process, it is 
important for auditors to pose questions about the adoption of AI 
and automation broadly. If you do not ask, you do not receive.
Start the conversation: Begin with an initial education or 
awareness session around AI risks at the senior leadership level, 
and then double-click down into the organization more broadly.
Survey the landscape: Determine if AI tools or other disruptive 
technologies are already being deployed within the organization, 
and if so, where.
Never stop learning: Auditors are being challenged to keep up 
with the pace of technology so they can effectively engage the 
business in this domain. 
Get out the map: Advise on setting up or refining an AI 
governance framework and implementation roadmap, inviting 
cross-functional input to ensure that risks across the entire 
organization are considered as solutions are rolled out.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
12
Internal audit’s role in
Building a digital backbone
Do not bend over backwards. Get a spine.
Advanced digital capabilities, such as generative artificial intelligence (GenAI), are making news. Despite the glitziness 
of the new capabilities, the concept of “adopting digital” within the internal audit function is not about implementing 
fancy tools; it is about accelerating the flow of data through revised methods and upskilled talent. Like a human 
backbone, digital hardware and software can be linked together to form a spinal column through which signals travel 
unimpeded.
Many internal audit functions have started their digital journeys by leveraging analytics capabilities. Yet, most still use 
these digital tools in a limited way, such as for inquiries or data sampling. To date, few functions view digital broadly 
enough to systematically move toward building a digital backbone—a spine capable of automating processes and 
driving efficiencies and insights across the entire audit lifecycle.
Imagine a world where: risk taxonomies are integrated into the digital backbone, and risk assessments flow end-to-
end throughout the audit lifecycle; enhanced insights are available across each audit phase; team members have 
visibility into a portfolio of audit findings and their current statuses; automated controls testing reduces manual 
activities to almost zero; and quantitative key risk indicators (KRIs), qualitative interview insights, and experienced 
auditor inputs are combined into a dynamic annual planning process.
These scenarios represent the art of the possible. While they may seem distant for many, now is the time to get on 
the road to seamless connectivity by making sure that the technologies you are acquiring, fit together. Only through 
an intentional approach to embracing digital will you be able to architect an integrated platform capable of carrying 
your internal audit function forward into a real-time, continuous future. 
When a large computer equipment company needed to expedite the development of internal-audit-related 
automations but did not want to distract their subject matter experts from their critical work, they deployed 
a Deloitte Automation and Analytics Development Pod. Composed of handpicked professionals, the Pod 
quickly established an operating and technology model that enabled team members to leverage their deep 
knowledge of internal audit procedures while developing automations within the client’s technology 
infrastructure. Working closely with key internal audit stakeholders, the Pod was able to produce 
automations and tangible results in a matter of months, ultimately providing development scale without the 
normal operational overhead.
Data points 
Our view
News item
Bigger technology investments often bring increased scrutiny. Leaders should be thoughtful in allocating 
capital and articulating value, yet 61% of respondents in the Deloitte 2023 Global Technology Leadership 
Study find it difficult to quantify the benefits of individual technology investments. Furthermore, their 
biggest challenge with measuring technology’s impact is quantifying the softer, less tangible benefits that are 
key to a function like internal audit, such as agility, innovation, or insights.


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
13
For more information
•
Deloitte: How Technology Can Boost Efficiencies, Foresight in Internal Audit
•
Deloitte: Finance 2025: Digital Transformation in Finance
•
Internal Audit Foundation and Deloitte: Moving Internal Audit Deeper into the Digital Age: Part 1 of 3 
Systematize and prioritize: More mature internal audit functions 
have demonstrated the benefits of applying a systematic and 
methodical approach to digital innovation, taking the time to 
assess their ways of working to identify and prioritize 
opportunities. 
Try, try again: Intentionally pilot proof of concepts and measure 
Return on Investment (ROI) to guide purpose-driven technology 
investments—those that not only deliver targeted improvements 
but also serve as vertebrae in an increasingly strong, yet flexible, 
digital backbone. 
Believe to achieve: People need to quickly experience the 
benefits of digital transformation in order to build momentum for 
the long haul. Leveraging technology to document risk 
assessments, input data, calculate risk ratings, and provide 
visibility across the audit department can be a good place to start 
in encouraging buy-in and helping people envision the art of the 
possible.
Spreadsheet dread: If your risk assessment process is laborious, 
then you are likely missing an opportunity to leverage technology 
to improve efficiencies.
Tech disconnect: Disparate platforms (i.e., “vertebrae”) used for 
risk assessment, planning, audit execution, issue remediation, 
and continuous monitoring can indicate the lack of a formal 
architecture for building a digital backbone.
My way or the highway: Limited process standardization can 
mean your internal audit function is ill-prepared for automation.
Analytic blinders: Digital has become synonymous with analytics 
within many internal audit functions, but it offers so much more. 
Make sure your organization sees past the valuable, but narrow, 
capabilities of analytics to embrace the full potential of an 
integrated digital backbone.
Put process first: It is important to focus on making the process 
more effective, rather than just implementing the technology 
itself. Ultimately, a digital transformation should help internal 
audit functions anticipate risks, assist the business in 
understanding those threats, and devise preventative measures.
Mindset matters: Whether you are a small or large function, the 
mindset and willingness to experiment with digital tools is 
paramount. Promote innovation, encourage ideas, and make it 
safe for people to learn through trial and error.
Inform to transform: You cannot move toward continuous 
auditing without continuous learning. In digital transformation, 
attaining data literacy and keeping up with business changes and 
emerging risks is often more challenging than selecting and 
implementing the right technology solutions.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
14
Internal audit’s role in
Controls modernization
Beyond assurance, controls modernization gives internal audit an opportunity to catalyze and advise.
An ounce of prevention is worth a pound of cure. Yet, when it comes to controls modernization, internal audit 
typically provides assurance retroactively, after the controls have been designed, implemented, and tested, and in 
some cases, found to be ineffective or inefficient. 
Understandably, some internal audit departments may be hesitant about commenting upfront on the control program 
undertaken by the first and second lines. While internal audit has an obvious duty to remain independent, this does 
not preclude advising management on how to achieve the shared ambition of the organization, which is making sure 
the end-to-end control program is understood, owned, and operated in an efficient and sustainable manner. For 
internal audit, or the organization at large for that matter, there is no success in reactively producing a hefty report 
calling out dozens of deficiencies. 
Internal audit can maximize its impact and value contribution by engaging with the first and second lines to share 
leading practices related to control program modernization. But, how can internal audit participate in a way that 
preserves its independence and avoids stepping on toes? Start by focusing on the risks. This includes helping 
management to truly understand what the risks are as well as to determine the risk appetite. For example, companies 
often try to boil the ocean when designing controls, rather than discerning what is non-negotiable versus what is 
tolerable. Internal audit is often in the best position to perform this assessment because of its overarching view of the 
risk landscape, and its seat at the audit committee table, which gives it a sense of the organization’s appetite around 
risk and control from the very top of the organization.
Modernizing the control environment and achieving greater levels of efficiency and effectiveness requires both 
greater automation and a recognition by the organization that internal audit can advise management and anticipate 
risks, in addition to providing traditional assurance. In short, it is about internal audit intervening earlier as a change 
agent, not acting after the fact as an insurance policy and supporting the shared ambition of the organization (i.e., 
how the first line supported by the second line can understand, own and operate the controls better).
Increasing business complexity and regulatory requirements are driving continual change to the risk 
environments for many organizations, and historical approaches to risk and controls may not be suited for 
the current atmosphere of digital transformation, persistent change, and uncertainty. As the business 
landscape continues to evolve, the risk of accounting and reporting misstatements rises, often due to the 
inability to respond to internal and external circumstances and adapt quickly to business changes.
Data points 
Our view
News item
€1 Billion
European Commission planned 
investment in AI.
>66%
of businesses plan to spend 
more on technology and 
software in 2023.
$4.7 Trillion
worldwide technology spending
projected in 2023.


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
15
For more information
•
Deloitte: Future of Controls
•
Wall Street Journal: Next Normal Internal Controls Embrace Digitization
•
Wall Street Journal: Building Control Readiness into Finance Transformations
Level set: Make sure all stakeholders within the three lines truly 
understand the risk landscape and their related roles and 
responsibilities so they can be responsive to the risks and 
challenge existing orthodoxies.
Zero in: Ensure management and compliance leaders are laser-
focused on mitigating the risk so they are designing the control 
program optimally to do only what it needs to do. 
Challenge the status quo: Ask if business and compliance teams 
have considered what portions of the control program can be 
digitized and automated on the path toward modernization and 
continuous controls monitoring.
Manual maneuvering:Lack of technology enablement, either 
fully or partially, can point to inefficiencies in the controls 
program that can be addressed, for example, by automating 
control performance, control testing, or project management 
through a governance, risk, and control (GRC) platform. 
User dissatisfaction: If users find it difficult to navigate the 
controls program, for example, due to excessive controls testing 
and an expanding control landscape, it could indicate an 
unoptimized environment with an elevated risk of failure.
Many layers: Does the organization have a ongoing process in 
place to challenge and optimize the control framework, along 
with methodologies such as a risk assessment? If the control 
environment is complicated with many layers, probably not.
Risky business: Sometimes control failures can be overlooked 
because they do not impact the business in a big way. In 
aggregate, these “little things” can add up, indicating the 
organization is trying to control for too many risks. The ineffective 
use of risk-based approach may result in exposure to material 
weaknesses and misaligned resources.
Engage early: Advise upfront on how to make the controls 
program risk-driven. For example, update methodologies and 
testing strategies using a risk-based versus a compliance mindset. 
Take a bite: Define the risk appetite so the first and second lines 
do not bite off more than they can chew.
Go beyond: Encourage the business to challenge existing 
orthodoxies to go beyond the basics of a controls program. For 
example, consider designing continuous controls monitoring to 
provide assurance instead of relying upon transactional controls. 
Assure by design: Align stakeholders and control owners to 
expectations, requirements, and strategic priorities in an 
assurance-by-design process.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
16
Internal audit’s role in
Environmental, Social, and Governance (ESG)
New and pending ESG reporting requirements add a splash of color to ESG risks.
Embracing ESG can be mighty good for business. A substantial body of evidence now demonstrates the strong 
connection between a company’s purpose—the differentiated role it serves in society—and business value. While 
skeptics remain, they will not be able to resist much longer amid a global regulatory push toward greater levels of ESG 
reporting and transparency, especially concerning sustainability disclosures. And, therein lies the issue.
As the pressure increases for companies to demonstrate environmental responsibility, social consciousness, and 
governance effectiveness, so too does the temptation to be less-than-forthcoming about how ESG targets are set and 
whether or not they are being attained on schedule. In fact, the ever-evolving business vernacular can barely keep up 
with the expanding range of ESG-related risks. Enter green washing, making a company’s products and activities seem 
more environmentally friendly or less environmentally damaging than they really are; blue washing, overstating a 
company’s commitment to socially responsible practices; and pink washing, or using a LGBTQ+-friendly marketing 
approach, while masking other negative actions. From green to pink to blue, such deceptive practices comprise an 
entire color palette of risks.
Uniquely positioned to help an organization anticipate such risks, internal audit should incorporate ESG into their 
audit plans, as well as serve as a trusted business advisor to management. For internal audit functions early in their 
ESG journeys, getting a lay of the land via a current-state ESG program assessment can be a good place to start. 
How are ESG targets set? Who reports to whom? Does the ESG strategy align with the overall business strategy? How 
does the company monitor progress? And, perhaps most importantly, what happens if things do not go as planned? 
Internal audit can accelerate change by evaluating and strengthening data, processes, and internal controls over 
sustainability information. In this way, ESG strategies, goals, and progress can be communicated transparently and can 
be relied upon by stakeholders, so the most colorful ESG risks can be avoided and a company’s reputation protected.
In September 2023, the California State Assembly and the California Senate passed the Climate Corporate 
Data Accountability Act, SB-253, and the Climate-Related Financial Risk Act, SB-261. The bills require public 
and private companies that do business in California to disclose their greenhouse gas emissions annually, and 
to report biennially on their climate-related financial risk. Both address investor concerns about dealing with 
the risks to the global financial system that are posed by climate change. SB-253 and SB-261 established 
the first official US regulation to mandate reporting disclosure requirements for greenhouse gas 
emissions and climate risks for large companies.
Data points 
Our view
News item
2X
growth in consumer-packagedgoods 
(CPG) products marketed as sustainable 
grew ~2x faster than those not marketed 
as sustainable and achieved a 5-YR CAGR 
of 9.43% vs. 4.98% for their conventional 
counterparts.
78%
of consumers were more likely 
to remember companies that 
exhibit a strong purpose.
53%
of surveyed CXOs reported new 
revenue streams from socially 
conscious offerings.


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
17
For more information
•
Wall Street Journal: California Climate Disclosures Getting Ready for New Requirements
•
Wall Street Journal: Internal Audit: Connecting Dots Between Value and ESG Reporting
•
Deloitte: The role of Internal Audit in the ESG agenda | Deloitte UK
Survey the landscape: If internal audit has not been involved in 
ESG to date, conduct a current state assessment of the 
organization’s overarching ESG efforts to identify potential 
enhancement opportunities.
Validate metrics: Perform a risk assessment to identify prioritized 
metrics and execute traditional assurance activities on ESG-
related metrics and disclosures to confirm completeness and 
accuracy.
Zoom in: Deliver ESG-centric internal audits to determine 
whether ESG-related objectives, activities, and risks are being 
appropriately identified, considered, assessed, and documented.
Frame the subject: With increased expectations around ESG 
metrics and disclosures, build a SOX-like framework to identify 
risks, controls, and test procedures, document process flows, and 
identify gaps and potential improvement opportunities. Define a 
controls assessment methodology to determine where to start.
Marketing magic: If ESG reporting still sits within marketing 
rather than with the financial reporting and/or sustainability 
teams, then the organization may be at greater risk for green, 
pink, or blue washing, or other misleading practices.
Seeing green: When a company raises green funds frequently or 
for large amounts, internal audit should pay attention. Ethically 
raised green loans must correspond to specific, qualified projects. 
Feeling blue: High staff turnover or increased attrition rates can 
be a symptom of blue washing and a lack of genuine commitment 
to diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) goals.
Wait-and-see: Some companies still do not see ESG as a priority, 
even with new regulations coming into force around the globe. 
ESG reporting is a long journey. Those who hesitate may be left 
behind. 
Talk it up: Internal audit should ensure that ESG is incorporated 
into conversations on risk; added to the internal audit plan; and 
provide assurance that ESG reporting and the control 
environment is sound. The aim is not to re-invent the wheel, but 
to apply the skill sets you already have to ESG.
Get familiar: Brief your internal audit team with well-established 
ESG reporting standards and frameworks such as the Global 
Reporting Initiative (GRI), Sustainability Accounting Standards 
Board (SASB), Greenhouse Gas (GHG) Protocol, and the Task 
Force on Climate-related Financial Disclosure (TFCD).
Verify actions: While ESG disclosure readiness is paramount, 
internal audit’s role goes beyond assuring the completeness and 
accuracy of the ESG-numbers calculated by the business; it also 
involves verifying the actions taken. 
Move with confidence: You do not need to be an ESG specialist in 
order to act. While upskilling is important, internal auditors can 
immediately add value by applying traditional auditing 
techniques and bringing professional skepticism to ESG reporting 
and communications. 
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
18
Internal audit’s role in 
Human capital management
In a future of work without boundaries, internal audit can help leaders get their bearings.
Just a few years ago, work was generally well-defined. You commuted to a workplace. You stayed there for a certain 
amount of time. And, you were paid a salary or an hourly rate to perform discrete tasks that were organized into a 
“job.” As described in the Deloitte Human Capital Trends 2023 report, many of the boundaries that used to provide 
the structure of work have been dismantled. Digital advances have redefined the concept of work as a physical space. 
Talent shortages are prompting companies to experiment with using skills, not jobs, as the baseline for how workforce 
decisions are made. And employee demands for more meaningful work, flexible workplace models, and more 
personalized career paths are pushing companies to focus more on the “S” in environmental, social, and governance 
(ESG).
Internal audit has a key part to play in helping management and those charged with governance to get their bearings 
on where the organization stands in this boundaryless world and how it can get to where it needs to be. And, like the 
flexible jobs of the future, internal audit’s role in human capital management (HCM) can be as broad or as narrow as 
the organization desires. For instance, the internal audit function can assess the maturity of talent recruitment or 
diversity, equity, and inclusion (DEI) efforts and determine if they are meeting their intended objectives. It can also 
identify risks, perform culture audits, and advise if programs for addressing deficiencies do not exist or need 
improvement. And, if an organization publishes “social” statistics to the marketplace, internal audit can provide 
assurance by independently testing the data for completeness and accuracy. 
Internal audit, with its broad perspective on enterprise risk and collaborative stakeholder relationships is well-
positioned to help organizations assess their HCM programs and to chart a path forward in boundaryless world—a 
realm that is poised to be more equitable, more technology-enabled, more employee-centric, and critically, more 
challenging from a risk perspective, especially around talent retention, worker productivity, brand reputation, and 
cyber security. The question is not whether internal auditors will help shape the future of work; it is only to what 
degree. 
The US Equal Employment Opportunity Commission (EEOC) filed 143 new employment discrimination 
lawsuits in fiscal year 2023, representing more than a 50% increase over fiscal year 2022 suit filings. The 
cases filed by the EEOC challenge workplace discrimination under all of the statutes enforced by the 
Commission and represent a broad array of issues, including barriers in recruitment and hiring, protecting 
vulnerable workers and persons from underserved communities, qualification standards and inflexible 
policies that discriminate against individuals with disabilities, the long-term effects of the COVID-19 
pandemic, advancing equal pay, combatting unlawful harassment, and preserving access to the legal system.
Data points 
Our view
News item
97%
are giving employees greater flexibility in 
work hours and location.
71%
of CEOs expect talent shortages 
to continue.
96%
plan to focus on the employee 
for in-demand talent. 


Internal Audit Hot Topics
© 2023. For information, contact Deloitte Touche Tohmatsu Limited
19
For more information
•
Deloitte: Managing Workforce Risk in an Era of Unpredictability and Disruption
•
Deloitte: The Skills-based Organization: A New Operating Model for Work and the Workforce
•
Wall Street Journal: How Boards Can Lend Muscle to Human Capital Strategy Setting
Shine a light: Assess human capital programs to provide 
actionable visibility into strengths and weaknesses and to 
promote continuous improvement.
Take stock: Analyze the organization’s current maturity in key 
HCM areas—such as infrastructure, talent, culture, brand, 
analytics, and leadership—that could produce both quantitative 
and qualitative insights.
Measure up: Advise on metrics tied to specific talent objectives 
that can be used in evaluations and periodic maturity 
assessments.
Look closer: Conduct special culture-related audits when the data 
warrants closer examination (e.g., high attrition rates for specific 
cohorts), or in response to stakeholder concerns and/or 
complaints.
Unsocial media: A preponderance of unflattering posts on job 
boards and recruitment sites can indicate a deeper problem with 
corporate culture.
Turnover tumult: High rates of attrition can indicate an 
ineffective human capital operating model that is elevating risk in 
multiple areas. 
Busy signal: Excessive hotline calls can be a cry for help in 
assessing and addressing HCM risks. 
Bad rep: There are places you would not want to work because of 
their reputation for unfair or discriminatory labor practices. Make 
sure your organization is not one of them.
Model risks: Evaluate the risks associated with the organization’s 
culture and human capital operating model, taking into account 
employee engagement, employee behaviors, political 
environment, and market signals.
Wash, rinse, repeat: Incorporate human capital risks, including 
DEI and culture risks, into the ongoing internal audit plan.
Lend a hand: Help leadership understand the risks and benefits 
associated with organizational culture. Provide input on training, 
communications, and policies.
Build confidence: Provide assurance that management has 
established effective processes to attract, recruit, hire, and retain 
diverse candidates, to eliminate bias, and to treat all employees 
equitably.
Warning signs
Getting the fundamentals right 
Taking the next steps 
