12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Why IT Matters to Higher Education

EDUCAUSE

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10:
Institutional Resilience

Susan Grajek and the 2023-2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10 Panel
Monday, October 16, 2023 Emerging Technologies and Trends

20 min read

Listen

The 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10 describes the contributions that
technology, data, and the workforce will make to advance
three dimensions of institutional resilience: mission resilience,
operational resilience, and financial resilience.

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 1/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Credit: Zach Peil/ EDUCAUSE © 2023

"Supporting resiliency and adaptation is a
major priority. We're using resiliency and
adaptation here as a very broad definition. Do
we have single points of failure in our
organization? Where do we have gaps in
business continuity plans? And | actually think
resiliency is the most critical attribute that will

sustain us in a strong future."

—Sarah Latham, Executive Vice President for Finance
and Administration, Brown University

The COVID-19 pandemic has left us with a changed world. As
we look ahead, the future appears even more challenging than
the one we once foresaw.

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 2/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Unfortunately, the pandemic isn't the only problem we need to
worry about. Higher education may have returned from the
unpredictable and always evolving pandemic land of Oz, but
the hard truths back in Kansas, our current reality, have
progressed. We're afloat in an ever-shifting sea of challenges:
the public's lack of confidence in higher education, the ongoing
student debt crisis, climate change and weather disasters,
cybersecurity breaches, deep fakes, culture polarization,
mental health crises, the campus demographic cliff, Al
overlords, hate crimes, global instability, or, yes, the next
pandemic. We can no longer assume that business as usual is
punctuated by the occasional unforeseen bad event. Anomaly
is the new normal.

We must adapt and evolve to thrive in a world of ongoing
change and unpredictability. Today's leadership agenda must
expand beyond growth and innovation to address risk and to
prepare for what may be ahead. In 2024, institutional and
technology leaders will focus their efforts on developing
institutional resilience. Institutional resilience is the ability to
anticipate, respond to, and adapt to rapidly changing
circumstances in ways that maximize opportunities and
minimize consequences of unforeseen events. The 2024
EDUCAUSE Top 10 describes the contributions that
technology, data, and the workforce will make to advance
three dimensions of institutional resilience: mission resilience,

operational resilience, and financial resilience.?

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 3/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM

#1.

#2.

#3.

#4,

#5.

#6.

#7.

#8.

#9.

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Cybersecurity as a Core Competency: Balancing
cost and risk

Driving to Better Decisions: |mproving data quality
and governance

The Enrollment Crisis: Harnessing data to
empower decision-makers

Diving Deep into Data: Leveraging analytics for
actionable insights to improve learning and student
success

Administrative Cost Reduction: Streamlining
processes, data, and technologies

Meeting Students Where They Are: Providing
universal access to institutional services

Hiring Resilience: Recruiting and retaining IT talent
under adverse circumstances

Financial Keys to the Future: Using technology and
data to help make tough choices

Balancing Budgets: Taking control of IT cost and
vendor management

#10. Adapting to the Future: Cultivating institutional

agility

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 4/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Credit: Zach Peil/ EDUCAUSE © 2023

Mission Resilience

Institutional missions—most commonly education, research,
and service—are enduring, but their expression and
advancement must adapt to the needs and opportunities of the
times. Education is the focal point of mission resilience for the
2024 Top 10.

The "student journey" is a way of describing the phases of a
student's relationship with the institution. It encompasses a
lifecycle starting with recruitment, admissions, and enrollment,
then moving to the many touchpoints and dimensions of an
enrolled student's academic work and extracurricular life, and
finally extending to the student's alumni relationship with the
institution. In 2024, technology leaders will be collaborating
with institutional stakeholders on all three phases of the
student journey.

Unfavorable demographic changes, affordability, and lessening
confidence in higher education are all contributing to an
enrollment crisis in higher education. Leaders are looking

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 5/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

beyond traditional-aged students, the traditional degree, and
existing academic programs to identify new potential
audiences and to develop more relevant offerings to maintain
and increase enrollments. Data is essential to make good
choices about potential innovations and to understand which
choices are working and which should be discarded (issue #3).

Much of students’ relationships to their institution is mediated
by technology. Today's students want digital experiences on
par with Amazon, Spotify, and Instagram, and they want choice
in where, when, and how they learn and interact with their
institution. Student life leaders recognize the many barriers to
students' achievement and are advocating for better and more
support services. This year, technology leaders are working to
develop multimodal channels to individualized services and
learning experiences (issue #6).

Students invest in higher education to achieve specific
outcomes. Analytics can help both students and their
institutional support team track and adjust their academic
progress at the course and credential levels. Contemporary
data sources and analysis and visualization tools are
increasingly abundant and helpful. The challenge is to
understand how to gain insights from these sources and then
how to act on those insights (issue #4).

#3. The Enrollment Crisis
Harnessing data to empower decision-makers

#4. Diving Deep into Data
Leveraging analytics for actionable insights to improve
learning and student success

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 6/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

#6. Meeting Students Where They Are
Providing universal access to institutional services

Back to Issues list

\ x te -.
d , |
- = f j
ee ail j y
‘ yr

Credit: Zach Peil / EDUCAUSE © 2023

Operational Resilience

Operational resilience extends to institutional assets and
workforce and to its planning, risk management, and decision-
making processes.

Cybersecurity remains (and will continue to remain) a major
institutional risk to institutional and constituents’ data.
Cybersecurity continues to be in an arms race, with security
devices and programs in an endless punch-counterpunch
between institutional investments and new cyberattacks.
Leaders must target their investments on the greatest, most
likely risks (issue #1).

Institutional leaders are increasingly turning to data to advise
their decision-making. It's possible today to get rapid and
relevant answers from data. That's important, because neither

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 7/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

crises nor opportunities are willing to pause and wait for
weeks to gather data or settle debates with anecdotes and
counterarguments (issue #2).

Comparatively low salaries, poorly expressed value packages
for existing and prospective staff, and rigid workplace policies
are impeding hiring managers from filling open positions. HR
and technology leaders need to improve the employee value

proposition in order to recruit and retain good technology and
data staff (issue #7).

During the pandemic, higher education overcame its reputation
for slow, grudging, and incremental change. Institutional
leaders can now use the pace, flexibility, and widespread
collaboration that characterized pandemic-era operations as a
catalyst for fostering enduring institutional agility (issue #10).

#1. Cybersecurity as a Core Competency
Balancing cost and risk

#2. Driving to Better Decisions
Improving data quality and governance

#7. Hiring Resilience
Recruiting and retaining IT talent under adverse
circumstances

#10. Adapting to the Future
Cultivating institutional agility

Back to Issues list

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 8/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Credit: Zach Peil/ EDUCAUSE © 2023

Financial Resilience

Many college and university fiscal foundations have been
based on decades-long trends and tactics. Enrollments, grants,
investments, gifts, and capital and operating costs have had a
certain range that shaped good or bad financial performance,
but leaders understood the levers to pull to adapt. Now the
trend lines at many institutions are grim, and outcomes are
unresponsive to the traditional levers.

While expansion of technology adds costs, it can also be an
efficiency driver and value enabler. Add the decision support
affordances of data, and technology leaders become powerful
partners in improving financial resilience. Technology and data
transformed into information can help reduce administrative
costs (issue #5) and provide estimates and projections to help
leaders make tough choices with more confidence (issue #8).

Technology costs have risen steeply, and in many cases faster
than inflation can account for. Technology and procurement
leaders are working with internal stakeholders and corporate

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 9/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

partners to address this financial risk, as well as the risk of
prematurely divesting from technologies that could lead to
future savings or new sources of income (issue #9).

#5. Administrative Cost Reduction
Streamlining processes, data, and technologies

#8. Financial Keys to the Future
Using technology and data to help make tough choices

#9. Balancing Budgets
Taking control of IT cost and vendor management

MISSION RESILIENCE

#3. The Enrollment Crisis

#4. Diving Deep into Data

#6. Meeting Students Where
They Are

. INSTITUTIONAL
RESILIENCE

oye
‘
wy Seer ae

FINANCIAL RESILIENCE

#5. Administrative Cost Reduction
#8. Financial Keys to the Future
#9. Balancing Budgets

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 10/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

The last several years have shown us that the unthinkable can
happen and that we need more than tradition, hope, and luck
to survive. We need to cultivate resilient institutions. In 2024,
leaders will be using technology and data to help higher
education increase its mission, operational, and financial
resilience.

Resources on the 2024 EDUCAUSE
Top 10 Website

e A video summary of the 2024 Top 10

e An infographic for the 2024 Top 10

e A corporate perspective on the 2024 Top 10

e The 2024 Top 10 general session at the
EDUCAUSE 2023 Annual Conference

e 2024 Higher Education Trend Watch (report)

2023-2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10 Panel
Members

Name Title Organization

Vipin Ahlawat Director of IT Loughborough
Services University, United
Kingdom

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 11/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM

Midhat
Asghar

Param Bedi

Tracey
Birdwell

Susan Bowen

George
Claffey

Sarah Cockrill

Mike
Dieckmann

John Fritz

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Deputy ClO

Vice President
and Chief
Operating
Officer

Program
Director,
Mosaic

Initiative

Vice President,
Chief Campus
Operations
Officer

Vice President
and ClO

Director of
Digital
Strategy and
Information
Technology

Associate Vice
President and
ClO

Associate Vice
President,

Prairie View A&M
University

Bucknell
University

Indiana University
Bloomington

Durham Technical
Community
College

Central
Connecticut State
University

Canterbury Christ
Church

University, United
Kingdom

Florida
Polytechnic
University

University of
Maryland,
Baltimore County

12/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM

Liv Gjestvang

Brian

Henderson

Jodi Ito

Kelli Renee
Jackson

Vince Kellen

Carolyn

Lightfoot

Dale Pike

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Instructional
Technology

ClO

CIO, Director of
Digital and
Information
Services

CISO

Director,
Digital User
Experience
Team

ClO

ClO, Office of
Information
Technology

Executive
Director and
Associate Vice
Provost for
Technology-
Enhanced
Learning

Denison
University

University of
Aberdeen, United
Kingdom

University of
Hawai'i System
Office

Coppin State
University

University of
California San
Diego

Lee College

Virginia Tech

13/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM

Mike Richichi

Jim Russell

loannis
Salmatzidis

Carol Smith

Standish
Stewart

Catherine
Zabriskie

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience

2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

AVP for IT and
Deputy CIO,
Baruch
Computing and
Technology
Center

CIO and Vice
President for
Digital
Strategy and
Planning

Director of IT

ClO

Vice President
and ClO, ITS

Senior Director,
Digital
Learning &
Design

Baruch College,
City University of
New York

Manhattanville
College

Aristotle
University of
Thessaloniki,
Greece

DePauw
University

Cuyahoga
Community
College

Brown University

14/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

#1: Cybersecurity as a Core
Competency

Balancing cost and risk

Vipin Ahlawat, Brian Henderson, loannis Salmatzidis, and
Standish Stewart

Worsening cyberthreats, more abundant and distributed data,
changing regulations, and the advent of Al are all good
reasons to pay further attention to cybersecurity in 2024.
Incorporating effective cybersecurity into the institutional DNA
by making it a core institutional competency can instill the
needed continuous investments and practices. One of those
practices is adopting a formal risk management framework to
help leaders find a balance among risk, cost, and opportunity.
Cybersecurity paired with effective risk management can help
institutions avoid a reputationally and financially crippling
cyberattack. But more than that, this pairing can increase trust
in the institution by internal and external constituents and
partners—trust that fosters growth and resilience.

Go deeper...

#2: Driving to Better Decisions
Improving data quality and governance
Param Bedi, Vipin Ahlawat, and Catherine Zabriskie

Data can help leaders navigate challenges of finite and often
shrinking resources and revenue. Data management and
visualization technologies have improved significantly, and Al

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 15/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

shows enormous potential. But difficulties with data quality
and governance continue to stall efforts in higher education to
use data to inform decision-making. The key to progress is
melding unified institutional leadership with input and
participation by individual constituents. If leaders value data as
a strategic asset, they will fund and prioritize data initiatives
and change the campus culture that creates data silos. Those
initiatives must provide all stakeholders with data and tools
that will simplify their work and improve the validity and
outcomes of the decisions they make.

Go deeper...

#3: The Enrollment Crisis

Harnessing data to empower decision-makers

Tracey Birdwell, George Claffey, Sarah Cockrill, and Dale
Pike

The enrollment crisis compels institutional leaders to
reexamine and redefine their academic offerings and their
support services to meet changing needs and tap into new
markets. Data can help decision-makers better understand and
identify prospective students, as well as which programs and
credentials to invest in. However, harnessing that data to
improve enrollment requires centralized, reliable data that can
be accessed by all who need it, the ability to use both data and
signals of change to anticipate emergent opportunities, a
culture of flexibility and adaptation, and external partnerships.

Go deeper...

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 16/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

#4: Diving Deep into Data

Leveraging analytics for actionable insights to improve
learning and student success

John Fritz, Mike Richichi, and Catherine Zabriskie

Decision-makers have more access than ever to data and
analytics related to learning and student success. Data sources
are increasing, and analytics tools are more sophisticated. The
questions that instructors, students, and institutional leaders
are asking range from which tools, modalities, and learning
spaces are most effective for the content and the student, to
what kinds of support students need to succeed and to what
the return on investment is for specific initiatives to improve
learning and student success. Leaders need to invest in their
data and analytics infrastructure and staffing, but only after
they develop a clear vision and concrete priorities that can
guide analytics initiatives and ensure they deliver actionable
insights.

Go deeper...

#5: Administrative Cost
Reduction

Streamlining processes, data, and technologies
Sarah Cockrill, Mike Richichi, and loannis Salmatzidis

Institutions can't not reduce their administrative costs.
Revenues and public confidence are both declining. New
sources of income may offset other revenue losses, but

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 17/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

students and legislators alike expect institutions to provide
more affordable credentials. Al may ultimately offer significant
opportunities to reinvent operations. But there are savings to
be had today through simplifying and standardizing processes,
data, and technologies. Leaders need to focus stakeholders on
the future of the institution and on the greater good, and they
need to make difficult trade-offs so that streamlining will
actually lower costs. The benefits not only will result in cost
savings but also will increase the institution's agility and Its
ability to innovate.

Go deeper...

#6: Meeting Students Where
They Are

Providing universal access to institutional services
Param Bedi, Susan Bowen, John Fritz, and Carolyn Lightfoot

The pandemic brought the depth and range of students' needs
to everyone's attention. Students with the greatest needs are
also those for whom an affordable postsecondary credential
may be the most transformative. Faculty, staff, and institutional
leaders are still freshly attuned to students' needs. Many
recognize the ways in which current institutional services, and
access to them, fall short of addressing those needs. But the
pandemic also saw the deployment of digital forms of many
previously campus-based services, along with a digital
expansion in additional student support services. Today's
opportunity is to transition from stop-gap measures to stable,
scalable services that benefit students. Success will hinge on

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 18/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

institutional agility, effective governance and leadership, and a
commitment to ensuring that all students benefit.

Go deeper...

#7: Hiring Resilience

Recruiting and retaining IT talent under adverse
circumstances

Liv Gjestvang, Kelli Renee Jackson, Mike Richichi, and Carol
Smith

Financial constraints and traditional workplace rigidity are
making it hard for technology and data managers to recruit,
hire, and retain staff. Compensation is important, but staff also
want work-life balance. Work-life balance boils down to
having workplace and schedule flexibility that can change over
time and to having reasonable workloads. Technology leaders
need to work with HR leaders to revise hiring, compensation,
and work policies to develop an employee value proposition
that fits today's needs and workforce. Hiring and work policies
must become flexible enough to support individuals' needs
and adapt to the unfolding impact of Al on higher education
and work. Best practices for workplace and workforce
management are in a great deal of flux as both employers and
employees struggle to understand and optimize post-
pandemic work.

Go deeper...

#8: Financial Keys to the Future

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 19/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Using technology and data to help make tough choices
Mike Dieckmann, Carolyn Lightfoot, and loannis Salmatzidis

Higher education institutions are struggling with shrinking
revenues and increasing costs. The task of modeling and
forecasting financial futures is particularly difficult today.
Higher education is undergoing a kind of identity crisis, cost
drivers are increasing, and previously stable business models
are in flux. Technology leaders can help reduce administrative
costs through consolidation and process automation. They can
manage the technology organization more efficiently. But
perhaps today's biggest opportunity for contributing to
financial health is by leading analytics initiatives that will
develop dynamic financial models and projections. The
groundwork requires significant data management,
reconciliation, and integration. This groundwork will help
establish the foundation for near-term financial models and
will also make it easier to incorporate Al and machine learning
later on.

Go deeper...

#9: Balancing Budgets
Taking control of IT cost and vendor management
Brian Henderson and Carol Smith

Prices of technology service and solution providers have risen
abruptly, often by double digits, for many core applications and
services. These increases are driven primarily by inflation,
supply chain disruptions, and a strong job market. Higher

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 20/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

education budgets are already precarious. Incorporating
significant technology cost increases with no offsetting return
on investment will lead to service and staffing reductions.
Leaders' best options are to build strong relationships with
solution providers and join consortia or form partnerships with
peer institutions to negotiate the most favorable pricing
possible.

Go deeper...

#10: Adapting to the Future

Cultivating institutional agility
George Claffey, Mike Dieckmann, and Dale Pike

Higher education leaders must learn how to adapt more
rapidly to change, opportunities, and crises. To do so, they
must go beyond spearheading the institutional response to
events. They must develop the institutional community's ability
to anticipate and prepare for a broad range of possible futures.
Institutional agility entails identifying differing future scenarios
and creating adaptive and flexible governance structures,
processes, and work. Since technology is often both a driver of
and a solution to change, technologists have years of
experience leading cross-institutional change initiatives. They
understand the institution, change, and technology. They
understand how to learn quickly from, and respond to, failure.
Technology leaders can help the institution better adapt to the
future by cultivating institutional agility.

Go deeper...

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 21/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Honorary Issue: Al... Friend or
Foe

Developing an institutional approach
Vince Kellen and Jim Russell

The impact of generative Al has preoccupied many of us in
higher education since the release of ChatGPT in November
2022. The higher education community is trying to make
meaning of this extraordinary breakthrough technology and
figure out whether it spells the end of higher education as we
know it... or the end of higher education itself. The impact of
generative Al on institutional strategy and priorities is still
incipient. Although the 2024 Top 10 slate of 16 candidate
issues included two related to Al, neither made the Top 10.
The Al issues were ranked #13 (A/... Friend or Foe:
Developing an institutional approach) and #16 (A/ Comes to
Class: Leveraging Al for authentic teaching and learning). But
because we believe that Al is poised to have a very large and
disruptive effect on our lives and our sector, we've given issue
#13 "honorary Top 10" status, enabling us to describe its
expanding influence.

Go deeper...

Reflections and Conclusion

In 2024, higher education leaders are focused on helping their
institutions to become more resilient in order to weather the
serious challenges ahead. The EDUCAUSE Institutional
Resilience Task Force defines higher education institutional

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 22/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

resilience as "the ability to anticipate, respond to, and adapt to
rapidly changing circumstances in ways that maximize
opportunities and minimize consequences of unforeseen
events." The task force adds: "More resilient institutions
anticipate stakeholders' needs to advance the mission and
objective of the institution, foster collaboration, and improve
equity by involving all impacted communities and resource

ecosystems."

What Do Resilient Institutions Look Like?

The 2024 Top 10 summarizes the important institutional
issues through which technology and data organizations will
be increasing institutional resilience. But what does a more
resilient institution look like? What institutional attributes, or
capabilities, are needed?

As the panel members deliberated about the Top 10, they
consistently described particular characteristics that
institutions will need to increase or acquire in order to be
successful. Six attributes were mentioned repeatedly: decisive;
trustworthy; interdependent; prepared; data-fluent; and
adaptive.*

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 23/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Trus¢
Wo,
7)
Ly

ye
Bes
2%)

MISSION RESILIENCE

#3. The Enrollment Crisis

#4. Diving Deep into Data

#6. Meeting Students Where
They Are

INSTITUTIONAL
RESILIENCE

RY)

adaptive
1Uapuadapies

FINANCIAL RESILIENCE

#5. Administrative Cost Reduction
#8. Financial Keys to the Future
#9. Balancing Budgets

9
4
ce

Decisive. Making decisions involves the risk of failure if the
decision turns out to be flawed. But many emergencies and
new opportunities won't wait for leaders to iteratively consult
numerous layers of stakeholders and slowly find consensus.
The 2024 Top 10 panelists stressed the importance of
governance structures with the experience and empowerment
to make rapid and sometimes difficult decisions.

Trustworthy. Trust is the most important characteristic of an
organizational culture.° Deloitte describes three dimensions of
trust that resilient institutions must have: physical trust,
emotional trust, and digital trust.© The Top 10 panel

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 24/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

emphasized emotional trust and digital trust as particularly
important to attract and retain students, faculty, and staff and
to restore public confidence in higher education.

Interdependent. None of the Top 10 issues can be addressed
by a single institutional unit. Hiring Resilience (#7) requires
collaboration among the IT, HR, and finance organizations. The
Enrollment Crisis (#3) calls on admissions staff, marketing
staff, IT staff, chief academic officers, and others. Independence
and silos will break higher education institutions because we
are all dependent on one another. Interdependence also has an
external facet. Increasingly, Top 10 panelists and their
institutional leaders whom we interviewed in the spring of
2023 are recognizing the need to partner with employers,
community leaders, and colleagues at other institutions to
recruit students, offer job-ready credentials, and ensure
seamless educational continuity.

Prepared. It's more difficult to adapt to change when no one
has made the effort to imagine alternative futures with
different possible crises and opportunities and then taken the
steps to prepare. Prepared institutions can respond quickly to
changing circumstances because leaders have already
anticipated the crises and opportunities (or something similar)
and have readied the organization for such eventualities.

Data-fluent. Resilient institutions need all constituents to
understand how to use data to ask questions and make
decisions and how to distinguish reliable data from poor data
and accurate information from false information. Data is the
bedrock of the ability to make informed decisions and prepare
for whatever the future may bring.

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 25/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

Adaptive. Higher education's notorious resistance to change
needs to change. The pandemic showed us all that even
entrenched individuals will adapt and upend the most sacred
rules in response to extreme circumstances. But it also showed
us that emergency pivots can be makeshift. The 10 Top
panelists emphasized that to be ready for a future filled with
change and edge cases, leaders must develop adaptive
institutions that can swiftly adjust to new realities.

Institutional Resilience and Digital
Transformation

For several years, EDUCAUSE has been talking about digital
transformation (Dx) and how a series of deep and coordinated
culture, workforce, and technology shifts can enable new
educational and operating models and transform institutional
operations, strategic directions, and value proposition. Much of
this work has been focused on innovation and on initiatives to
attract new students or funding sources, offer new credentials,
expand to new physical or digital campuses, and help more
students earn credentials more affordably. Implicit in all this
work is the notion of improvement.

But risk is becoming a larger ongoing element of life. Our
world is changing quickly and dramatically. That change fuels
innovation, but it also powers risk. Digital transformation
needn't be directed just toward improving operating models
and advancing missions; it can also be motivated by reducing
risk. Institutional resilience has been a missing element of Dx
frameworks, and that needs to change. EDUCAUSE is working
to incorporate attributes and outcomes of institutional
resilience into our Dx resources. This will enable higher

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 26/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

education leaders to build on current Dx initiatives rather than
try to figure out how to take on yet another "big new thing"
when they are already overwhelmed.

Higher education still powers individual success. In the United
States, college graduates experience far lower unemployment
and poverty rates than their peers whose highest credential is
a high school degree.” They also earn, on average, $1.2 million
more over their lifetime. But the resultant net wealth from that
income premium is eroded when students are burdened with
student loan debt. Even worse off are the millions of people
who, even with student loans, weren't able to earn the
credentials that would lead to higher-paying jobs. In a recent
article, Paul Tough looked at this situation through the lens of
net wealth, rather than income, and concluded, "For most
people, the new economics of higher ed make going to college
a risky bet."8

Yet Tough's article ended with the projection for increased
employment opportunities for college graduates in the coming
years and a shortage of 6.5 to 8.5 million graduates available
to fill those jobs. Postsecondary credentials remain vital to the
health of our economy. We must ensure they also contribute to
individuals’ economic health. But to do so, we must make
changes. We must reduce the financial burden that students
are taking on, and we must make it possible for every
matriculating student to earn a credential. For years,
institutional change has been focused on innovation. It is time
to learn how to adapt to a world in which risks proliferate—for
students as well as institutions. It is time to develop
institutional resilience and, in that way, contribute to individual
students' success. In 2024, higher education leaders will be

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 27/31


12/18/23, 2:54 PM 2024 EDUCAUSE Top 10: Institutional Resilience | EDUCAUSE Review

using data and technology to increase mission, operational,
and financial resilience. Don't be left behind.

Acknowledgments

The EDUCAUSE Top 10 is one of our most heavily used
resources, and so we take its development very seriously. The
project relies on the dedicated EDUCAUSE members who
agree to participate in the Top 10 panel every year. | am so
thankful to the panelists for their expertise and dedication to
the project and for the access they provide to leaders at their
institutions.

Producing the article and associated content calls on staff
throughout EDUCAUSE. My colleagues make this effort fun
and feasible. Teddy Diggs doesn't just edit the article after
we've drafted it; she participates throughout the life of the
project to provide advice on how to improve the process and
the final product. And she offers welcome encouragement
when we try something new ... which we almost always do.
Greg Dobbin joins her in helping ensure the publication lives
up to EDUCAUSE standards and is worth your time. Kathe
Pelletier, Joe Potchanant, Betsy Reinitz, Mark McCormack, John
O'Brien, Jamie Reeves, and Catherine Yang are just some of the
EDUCAUSE staff who give substantive feedback on the
approach, content, and tone of the article. Zach Peil is our data
and graphics designer. He is as productive as he is talented
and as talented as he is efficient (and he is terrific at all three!).
Nicole Muscanell, Mark McCormack, and Jamie Reeves make
sure the survey and data are fielded and analyzed well and on
time. This year those efforts were particularly time-consuming,
as we had transitioned to new people and a new process. | am

https://er.educause.edu/articles/2023/10/2024-educause-top-10-institutional-resilience 28/31
